# ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

In May 2013, as I sat in that hotel room in Hong Kong wondering whether any
journalists would show up to meet me, I’d never felt more alone. Six years
later, I find myself in quite the opposite situation, having been welcomed
into an extraordinary and ever-expanding global tribe of journalists, lawyers,
technologists, and human rights advocates to whom I owe an incalculable debt.
At the conclusion of a book, it’s traditional for an author to thank the
people who helped make the book possible, and I certainly intend to do that
here, but given the circumstances I’d be remiss if I didn’t also thank the
people who have helped make my life possible—by advocating for my freedom and,
especially, by working ceaselessly and selflessly to protect our open
societies as well as the technologies that have brought us, and that bring
everyone, together.

Over the last nine months, Joshua Cohen has taken me to writing school,
helping to transform my rambling reminiscences and capsule manifestos into a
book that I hope he can be proud of.

Chris Parris-Lamb proved himself a shrewd and patient agent, while Sam
Nicholson provided astute and clarifying edits and support, as did the entire
team at Metropolitan, from Gillian Blake to Sara Bershtel, Riva Hocherman, and
Grigory Tovbis.

The success of this team is a testament to its members’ talents, and to the
talents of the man who assembled it—Ben Wizner, my lawyer, and, I am honored
to say, my friend.

In the same vein, I’d like to thank my international team of lawyers who have
worked tirelessly to keep me free. I would also like to thank Anthony Romero,
the ACLU’s director, who embraced my cause at a time of considerable political
risk for the organization, along with the other ACLU staff who have helped me
throughout the years, including Bennett Stein, Nicola Morrow, Noa Yachot, and
Daniel Kahn Gillmor.

Additionally, I’d like to acknowledge the work of Bob Walker, Jan Tavitian,
and their team at the American Program Bureau, who have allowed me to make a
living by spreading my message to new audiences around the world.

Trevor Timm and my fellow board members at the Freedom of the Press Foundation
have provided the space and resources for me to return to my true passion,
engineering for social good. I am especially grateful to our CTO Micah Lee,
former FPF operations manager Emmanuel Morales, and current FPF board member
Daniel Ellsberg, who has given the world the model of his rectitude, and given
me the warmth and candor of his friendship.

This book was written using free and open-source software. I would like to
thank the Qubes Project, the Tor Project, and the Free Software Foundation.

My earliest intimations of what it was like to write against deadline came
from the masters, Glenn Greenwald, Laura Poitras, Ewen Macaskill, and Bart
Gellman, whose professionalism is informed by a passionate integrity. Having
been edited now myself, I have gained a new appreciation of their editors, who
refused to be intimidated and took the risks that gave meaning to their
principles.

My deepest gratitude is reserved for Sarah Harrison.

And my heart belongs to my family, extended and immediate—to my father, Lon,
to my mother, Wendy, and to my brilliant sister, Jessica.

The only way I can end this book is the way I began it: with a dedication to
Lindsay, whose love makes life out of exile.



First published 2019 by Metropolitan Books, Henry Holt and Company, LLC

First published in the UK 2019 by Macmillan

This electronic edition first published in the UK 2019 by Macmillan

an imprint of Pan Macmillan 20 New Wharf Road, London N1 9RR

Associated companies throughout the world

[www.panmacmillan.com](http://www.panmacmillan.com/)

ISBN 978-1-5290-3567-4

Copyright © Edward Snowden 2019.

Jacket design by Rodrigo Corral

Jacket photograph © Platon

The right of Edward Snowden to be identified as the author of this work has
been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents Act
1988.

You may not copy, store, distribute, transmit, reproduce or otherwise make
available this publication (or any part of it) in any form, or by any means
(electronic, digital, optical, mechanical, photocopying, recording or
otherwise), without the prior written permission of the publisher. Any person
who does any unauthorized act in relation to this publication may be liable to
criminal prosecution and civil claims for damage.

A CIP catalogue record for this book is available from the British Library.

Visit [www.panmacmillan.com](http://www.panmacmillan.com/) to read more about
all our books and to buy them. You will also find features, author interviews
and news of any author events, and you can sign up for e-newsletters so that
you’re always first to hear about our new releases.
