# Hong Kong

The deep psychological appeal of games, which are really just a series of
increasingly difficult challenges, is the belief that they can be won. Nowhere
is this more clear to me than in the case of the Rubik’s Cube, which satisfies
a universal fantasy: that if you just work hard enough and twist yourself
through all of the possibilities, everything in the world that appears
scrambled and incoherent will finally click into position and become perfectly
aligned; that human ingenuity is enough to transform the most broken and
chaotic system into something logical and orderly where every face of three-
dimensional space shines with perfect uniformity.

I’d had a plan—I’d had multiple plans—in which a single mistake would have
meant getting caught, and yet I hadn’t been: I’d made it out of the NSA, I’d
made it out of the country. I had beaten the game. By every standard I could
imagine, the hard part was over. But my imagination hadn’t been good enough,
because the journalists I’d asked to come meet me weren’t showing up. They
kept postponing, giving excuses, apologizing.

I knew that Laura Poitras—to whom I’d already sent a few documents and the
promise of many more—was ready to fly anywhere from New York City at a
moment’s notice, but she wasn’t going to come alone. She was busy trying to
get Glenn Greenwald to commit, trying to get him to buy a new laptop that he
wouldn’t put online. Trying to get him to install encryption programs so we
could better communicate. And there I was, in Hong Kong, watching the clock
tick away the hours, watching the calendar tick off the days, beseeching,
begging: _please come before the NSA realizes I’ve been gone from work too
long_. It was tough to think about all the lengths I’d gone to only to face
the prospect of being left in Hong Kong high and dry. I tried to work up some
sympathy for these journalists who seemed too busy or too nervous to lock down
their travel plans, but then I’d recall just how little of the material for
which I was risking everything would actually make it to the public if the
police arrived first. I thought about my family and Lindsay and how foolish it
was to have put my life in the hands of people who didn’t even know my name.

I barricaded myself in my room at the Mira Hotel, which I chose because of its
central location in a crowded shopping and business district. I put the
“Privacy Please—Do Not Disturb” sign on the door handle to keep housekeeping
out. For ten days, I didn’t leave the room for fear of giving a foreign spy
the chance to sneak in and bug the place. With the stakes so high, the only
move I had was to wait. I converted the room into a poor man’s operations
center, the invisible heart of the network of encrypted Internet tunnels from
which I’d send increasingly shrill pleas to the absent emissaries of our free
press. Then I’d stand at the window hoping for a reply, looking out onto the
beautiful park I’d never visit. By the time Laura and Glenn finally arrived,
I’d eaten every item on the room service menu.

That isn’t to say that I just sat around during that week and a half writing
wheedling messages. I also tried to organize the last briefing I’d ever
give—going through the archive, figuring out how best to explain its contents
to the journalists in the surely limited time we’d have together. It was an
interesting problem: how to most cogently express to nontechnical people who
were almost certainly inclined to be skeptical of me the fact that the US
government was surveilling the world and the methods by which it was doing so.
I put together dictionaries of terms of art like “metadata” and
“communications bearer.” I put together glossaries of acronyms and
abbreviations: CCE, CSS, DNI, NOFORN. I made the decision to explain not
through technologies, or systems, but through surveillance programs—in
essence, through stories—in an attempt to speak their language. But I couldn’t
decide which stories to give them first, and I kept shuffling them around,
trying to put the worst crimes in the best order.

I had to find a way to help at least Laura and Glenn understand something in
the span of a few days that it had taken me years to puzzle out. Then there
was another thing: I had to help them understand who I was and why I’d decided
to do this.

* * *

AT LONG LAST, Glenn and Laura showed up in Hong Kong on June 2. When they came
to meet me at the Mira, I think I disappointed them, at least initially. They
even told me as much, or Glenn did: He’d been expecting someone older, some
chain-smoking, tipsy depressive with terminal cancer and a guilty conscience.
He didn’t understand how a person as young as I was—he kept asking me my
age—not only had access to such sensitive documents, but was also so willing
to throw his life away. For my part, I didn’t know how they could have
expected some graybeard, given my instructions to them about how to meet: Go
to a certain quiet alcove by the hotel restaurant, furnished with an
alligator-skin-looking pleather couch, and wait around for a guy holding a
Rubik’s Cube. The funny thing was that I’d originally been wary of using that
bit of tradecraft, but the cube was the only thing I’d brought with me that
was likely to be unique and identifiable from a distance. It also helped me
hide the stress of waiting for what I feared might be the surprise of
handcuffs.

That stress would reach its visible peak just ten or so minutes later, when
I’d brought Laura and Glenn up to my room—#1014, on the tenth floor. Glenn had
barely had the chance to stow his smartphone in my minibar fridge at my
request when Laura started rearranging and adjusting the lights in the room.
Then she unpacked her digital video camera. Though we’d agreed, over encrypted
email, that she could film our encounter, I wasn’t ready for the reality.

Nothing could have prepared me for the moment when she pointed her camera at
me, sprawled out on my unmade bed in a cramped, messy room that I hadn’t left
for the past ten days. I think everybody has had this kind of experience: the
more conscious you are of being recorded, the more self-conscious you become.
Merely the awareness that there is, or might be, somebody pressing Record on
their smartphone and pointing it at you can cause awkwardness, even if that
somebody is a friend. Though today nearly all of my interactions take place
via camera, I’m still not sure which experience I find more alienating: seeing
myself on film or being filmed. I try to avoid the former, but avoiding the
latter is now difficult for everyone.

In a situation that was already high-intensity, I stiffened. The red light of
Laura’s camera, like a sniper’s sight, kept reminding me that at any moment
the door might be smashed in and I’d be dragged off forever. And whenever I
wasn’t having that thought, I kept thinking about how this footage was going
to look when it was played back in court. I realized there were so many things
I should have done, like putting on nicer clothes and shaving. Room-service
plates and trash had accumulated throughout the room. There were noodle
containers and half-eaten burgers, piles of dirty laundry and damp towels on
the floor.

It was a surreal dynamic. Not only had I never met any filmmakers before being
filmed by one, I had never met any journalists before serving as their source.
The first time I ever spoke aloud to anyone about the US government’s system
of mass surveillance, I was speaking to everyone in the world with an Internet
connection. In the end, though, regardless of how rumpled I looked and stilted
I sounded, Laura’s filming was indispensable, because it showed the world
exactly what happened in that hotel room in a way that newsprint never could.
The footage she shot over the course of our days together in Hong Kong can’t
be distorted. Its existence is a tribute not just to her professionalism as a
documentarian but to her foresight.

I spent the week between June 3 and June 9 cloistered in that room with Glenn
and his colleague from the _Guardian_ , Ewen MacAskill, who joined us a bit
later that first day. We talked and talked, going through the NSA’s programs,
while Laura hovered and filmed. In contrast to the frenetic days, the nights
were empty and desolate. Glenn and Ewen would retreat to their own hotel, the
nearby W, to write up their findings into articles. Laura would disappear to
edit her footage and do her own reporting with Bart Gellman of the _Washington
Post_ , who never made it to Hong Kong but worked remotely with the documents
he received from her.

I’d sleep, or try to—or else I’d put on the TV, find an English-language
channel like the BBC or CNN, and watch the international reaction. On June 5,
the _Guardian_ broke Glenn’s first story, the FISA court order that authorized
the NSA to collect information from the American telecom Verizon about every
phone call it handled. On June 6, it ran Glenn’s PRISM story, pretty much
simultaneously with a similar account in the _Washington Post_ by Laura and
Bart. I knew, and I think we all knew, that the more pieces came out the more
likely it was that I’d be identified, particularly because my office had begun
emailing me asking for status updates and I wasn’t answering. But though Glenn
and Ewen and Laura were unfailingly sympathetic to my ticking time-bomb
situation, they never let their desire to serve the truth be tempered by that
knowledge. And following their example, neither did I.

Journalism, like documentary film, can only reveal so much. It’s interesting
to think about what a medium is forced to omit, both by convention and
technology. In Glenn’s prose, especially in the _Guardian_ , you got a laser-
focused statement of fact, stripped of the dogged passion that defines his
personality. Ewen’s prose more fully reflected his character: sincere,
gracious, patient, and fair. Meanwhile, Laura, who saw all but was rarely
seen, had an omniscient reserve and a sardonic wit—half master spy, half
master artist.

As the revelations ran wall to wall on every TV channel and website, it became
clear that the US government had thrown the whole of its machinery into
identifying the source. It was also clear that when they did, they would use
the face they found—my face—to evade accountability: instead of addressing the
revelations, they’d impugn the credibility and motives of “the leaker.” Given
the stakes, I had to seize the initiative before it was too late. If I didn’t
explain my actions and intentions, the government would, in a way that would
swing the focus away from its misdeeds.

The only hope I had of fighting back was to come forward first and identify
myself. I’d give the media just enough personal detail to satisfy their
mounting curiosity, with a clear statement that what mattered wasn’t me, but
rather the subversion of American democracy. Then I’d vanish just as quickly
as I’d appeared. That, at least, was the plan.

Ewen and I decided that he’d write a story about my IC career and Laura
suggested filming a video statement to appear alongside it in the _Guardian_.
In it, I’d claim direct and sole responsibility as the source behind the
reporting on global mass surveillance. But even though Laura had been filming
all week (a lot of that footage would make it into her feature documentary,
_Citizenfour_ ), we just didn’t have the time for her to go through everything
she’d shot in search of snippets of me speaking coherently and making eye
contact. What she proposed, instead, was my first recorded statement, which
she started filming right there and then—the one that begins, “Uh, my name is
Ed Snowden. I’m, ah, twenty-nine years old.”

Hello, world.

* * *

WHILE I’VE NEVER once regretted tugging aside the curtain and revealing my
identity, I do wish I had done it with better diction and a better plan in
mind for what was next. In truth, I had no plan at all. I hadn’t given much
thought to answering the question of what to do once the game was over, mainly
because a winning conclusion was always so unlikely. All I’d cared about was
getting the facts out into the world: I figured that by putting the documents
into the public record, I was essentially putting myself at the public’s
mercy. No exit strategy could be the only exit strategy, because any next step
I might have premeditated taking would have run the risk of undermining the
disclosures.

If I’d made preexisting arrangements to fly to a specific country and seek
asylum, for example, I would’ve been called a foreign agent of that country.
Meanwhile, if I returned to my own country, the best I could hope for was to
be arrested upon landing and charged under the Espionage Act. That would’ve
entitled me to a show trial deprived of any meaningful defense, a sham in
which all discussion of the most important facts would be forbidden.

The major impediment to justice was a major flaw in the law, a purposeful flaw
created by the government. Someone in my position would not even be allowed to
argue in court that the disclosures I made to journalists were civically
beneficial. Even now, years after the fact, I would not be allowed to argue
that the reporting based on my disclosures had caused Congress to change
certain laws regarding surveillance, or convinced the courts to strike down a
certain mass surveillance program as illegal, or influenced the attorney
general and the president of the United States to admit that the debate over
mass surveillance was a crucial one for the public to have, one that would
ultimately strengthen the country. All these claims would be deemed not just
irrelevant but inadmissible in the kind of proceedings that I would face were
I to head home. The only thing my government would have to prove in court is
that I disclosed classified information to journalists, a fact that is not in
dispute. This is why anyone who says I have to come back to the States for
trial is essentially saying I have to come back to the States for sentencing,
and the sentence would, now as then, surely be a cruel one. The penalty for
disclosing top secret documents, whether to foreign spies or domestic
journalists, is up to ten years per document.

From the moment that Laura’s video of me was posted on the _Guardian_ website
on June 9, I was marked. There was a target on my back. I knew that the
institutions I’d shamed would not relent until my head was bagged and my limbs
were shackled. And until then—and perhaps even after then—they would harass my
loved ones and disparage my character, prying into every aspect of my life and
career, seeking information (or opportunities for disinformation) with which
to smear me. I was familiar enough with how this process went, both from
having read classified examples of it within the IC and from having studied
the cases of other whistleblowers and leakers. I knew the stories of heroes
like Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo, and more recent opponents of
government secrecy like Thomas Tamm, an attorney with the Justice Department’s
Office of Intelligence Policy and Review who served as a source for much of
the warrantless wiretapping reporting of the mid-2000s. There were also Drake,
Binney, Wiebe, and Loomis, the digital-age successors to Perry Fellwock, who
back in 1971 had revealed the existence of the then-unacknowledged NSA in the
press, which caused the Senate’s Church Committee (the forerunner of today’s
Senate Select Committee on Intelligence) to try to ensure that the agency’s
brief was limited to the gathering of foreign rather than domestic signals
intelligence. And then there was US Army Private Chelsea Manning, who for the
crime of exposing America’s war crimes was court-martialed and sentenced to
thirty-five years in prison, of which she served seven, her sentence commuted
only after an international outcry arose over the treatment she received
during solitary confinement.

All of these people, whether they faced prison or not, encountered some sort
of backlash, most often severe and derived from the very abuse that I’d just
helped expose: surveillance. If ever they’d expressed anger in a private
communication, they were “disgruntled.” If they’d ever visited a psychiatrist
or a psychologist, or just checked out books on related subjects from a
library, they were “mentally unsound.” If they’d been drunk even once, they
were said to be alcoholics. If they’d had even one extramarital affair, they
were said to be sexual deviants. Not a few lost their homes and were
bankrupted. It’s easier for an institution to tarnish a reputation than to
substantively engage with principled dissent—for the IC, it’s just a matter of
consulting the files, amplifying the available evidence, and, where no
evidence exists, simply fabricating it.

As sure as I was of my government’s indignation, I was just as sure of the
support of my family, and of Lindsay, who I was certain would
understand—perhaps not forgive, but understand—the context of my recent
behavior. I took comfort from recalling their love: it helped me cope with the
fact that there was nothing left for me to do, no further plans in play. I
could only extend the belief I had in my family and Lindsay into a perhaps
idealistic belief in my fellow citizens, a hope that once they’d been made
aware of the full scope of American mass surveillance they’d mobilize and call
for justice. They’d be empowered to seek that justice for themselves, and, in
the process, my own destiny would be decided. This was the ultimate leap of
faith, in a way: I could hardly trust anyone, so I had to trust everyone.

* * *

WITHIN HOURS AFTER my _Guardian_ video ran, one of Glenn’s regular readers in
Hong Kong contacted him and offered to put me in touch with Robert Tibbo and
Jonathan Man, two local attorneys who then volunteered to take on my case.
These were the men who helped get me out of the Mira when the press finally
located me and besieged the hotel. As a diversion, Glenn went out the front
lobby door, where he was immediately thronged by the cameras and mics.
Meanwhile, I was bundled out of one of the Mira’s myriad other exits, which
connected via a skybridge to a mall.

I like Robert—to have been his client is to be his friend for life. He’s an
idealist and a crusader, a tireless champion of lost causes. Even more
impressive than his lawyering, however, was his creativity in finding safe
houses. While journalists were scouring every five-star hotel in Hong Kong, he
took me to one of the poorest neighborhoods of the city and introduced me to
some of his other clients, a few of the nearly twelve thousand forgotten
refugees in Hong Kong—under Chinese pressure, the city has maintained a dismal
1 percent approval rate for permanent residency status. I wouldn’t usually
name them, but since they have bravely identified themselves to the press, I
will: Vanessa Mae Bondalian Rodel from the Philippines, and Ajith
Pushpakumara, Supun Thilina Kellapatha, and Nadeeka Dilrukshi Nonis, all from
Sri Lanka.

These unfailingly kind and generous people came through with charitable grace.
The solidarity they showed me was not political. It was human, and I will be
forever in their debt. They didn’t care who I was, or what dangers they might
face by helping me, only that there was a person in need. They knew all too
well what it meant to be forced into a mad escape from mortal threat, having
survived ordeals far in excess of anything I’d dealt with and hopefully ever
will: torture by the military, rape, and sexual abuse. They let an exhausted
stranger into their homes—and when they saw my face on TV, they didn’t falter.
Instead, they smiled, and took the opportunity to reassure me of their
hospitality.

Though their resources were limited—Supun, Nadeeka, Vanessa, and two little
girls lived in a crumbling, cramped apartment smaller than my room at the
Mira—they shared everything they had with me, and they shared it unstintingly,
refusing my offers to reimburse them for the cost of taking me in so
vociferously that I had to hide money in the room to get them to accept it.
They fed me, they let me bathe, they let me sleep, and they protected me. I
will never be able to explain what it meant to be given so much by those with
so little, to be accepted by them without judgment as I perched in corners
like a stray street cat, skimming the Wi-Fi of distant hotels with a special
antenna that delighted the children.

Their welcome and friendship was a gift, for the world to even have such
people is a gift, and so it pains me that, all these years later, the cases of
Ajith, Supun, Nadeeka, and Nadeeka’s daughter are still pending. The
admiration I feel for these folks is matched only by the resentment I feel
toward the bureaucrats in Hong Kong, who continue to deny them the basic
dignity of asylum. If folks as fundamentally decent and selfless as these
aren’t deemed worthy of the protection of the state, it’s because the state
itself is unworthy. What gives me hope, however, is that just as this book was
going to press, Vanessa and her daughter received asylum in Canada. I look
forward to the day when I can visit all of my old Hong Kong friends in their
new homes, wherever those may be, and we can make happier memories together in
freedom.

On June 14, the US government charged me under the Espionage Act in a sealed
complaint, and on June 21 they formally requested my extradition. I knew it
was time to go. It was also my thirtieth birthday.

Just as the US State Department sent its request, my lawyers received a reply
to my appeal for assistance from the UN High Commissioner on Refugees: there
was nothing that could be done for me. The Hong Kong government, under Chinese
pressure or not, resisted any UN effort at affording me international
protection on its territory, and furthermore asserted that it would first have
to consider the claims of my country of citizenship. In other words, Hong Kong
was telling me to go home and deal with the UN from prison. I wasn’t just on
my own—I was unwelcome. If I was going to leave freely, I had to leave now. I
wiped my four laptops completely clean and destroyed the cryptographic key,
which meant that I could no longer access any of the documents even if
compelled. Then I packed the few clothes I had and headed out. There was no
safety to be found in the “fragrant harbor.”

