<!-- order:6 -->
# The Invisible Wall

Elizabeth City is a quaint, midsize port town with a relatively intact
historic core. Like most other early American settlements, it grew around the
water, in this case around the banks of the Pasquotank River, whose name is an
English corruption of an Algonquin word meaning “where the current forks.” The
river flows down from Chesapeake Bay, through the swamps of the Virginia–North
Carolina border, and empties into Albemarle Sound alongside the Chowan, the
Perquimans, and other rivers. Whenever I consider what other directions my
life might have taken, I think of that watershed: no matter the particular
course the water travels from its source, it still ultimately arrives at the
same destination.

My family has always been connected to the sea, my mother’s side in
particular. Her heritage is straight Pilgrim—her first ancestor on these
shores was John Alden, the _Mayflower_ ’s cooper, or barrelmaker. He became
the husband of a fellow passenger named Priscilla Mullins, who had the dubious
distinction of being the only single woman of marriageable age onboard, and so
the only single woman of marriageable age in the whole first generation of the
Plymouth Colony.

John and Priscilla’s Thanksgiving-time coupling almost never happened,
however, due to the meddling of the commander of the Plymouth Colony, Myles
Standish. His love for Priscilla, and Priscilla’s rejection of him and
eventual marriage to John, became the basis of a literary work that was
referenced throughout my youth, _The Courtship of Miles Standish_ by Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow (himself an Alden-Mullins descendant):

> Nothing was heard in the room but the hurrying pen of the stripling,
>
> Busily writing epistles important, to go by the Mayflower,
>
> Ready to sail on the morrow, or next day at latest, God willing!
>
> Homeward bound with the tidings of all that terrible winter,
>
> Letters written by Alden, and full of the name of Priscilla,
>
> Full of the name and the fame of the Puritan maiden Priscilla!

John and Priscilla’s daughter, Elizabeth, was the first Pilgrim child born in
New England. My mother, whose name is also Elizabeth, is her direct
descendant. Because the lineage is almost exclusively through the women,
though, the surnames changed with nearly every generation—with an Alden
marrying a Pabodie marrying a Grinnell marrying a Stephens marrying a Jocelin.
These seafaring ancestors of mine sailed down the coast from what’s now
Massachusetts to Connecticut and New Jersey—plying trade routes and dodging
pirates between the Colonies and the Caribbean—until, with the Revolutionary
War, the Jocelin line settled in North Carolina.

Amaziah Jocelin, also spelled Amasiah Josselyn, among other variants, was a
privateer and war hero. As captain of the ten-gun barque _The Firebrand_ , he
was credited with the defense of Cape Fear. Following American independence,
he became the US Navy Agent, or supply officer, of the Port of Wilmington,
where he also established the city’s first chamber of commerce, which he
called, funnily enough, the Intelligence-Office. The Jocelins and their
descendants—the Moores and Halls and Meylands and Howells and Stevens and
Restons and Stokleys—who comprise the rest of my mother’s side fought in every
war in my country’s history, from the Revolution and the Civil War (in which
the Carolinian relatives fought for the Confederacy against their New
England/Union cousins), to both world wars. Mine is a family that has always
answered the call of duty.

My maternal grandfather, whom I call Pop, is better known as Rear Admiral
Edward J. Barrett. At the time of my birth he was deputy chief, aeronautical
engineering division, Coast Guard Headquarters, Washington, DC. He’d go on to
hold various engineering and operational commands, from Governors Island, New
York City, to Key West, Florida, where he was director of the Joint
Interagency Task Force East (a multiagency, multinational US Coast Guard–led
force dedicated to the interdiction of narcotics trafficking in the
Caribbean). I wasn’t aware of how high up the ranks Pop was rising, but I knew
that the welcome-to-command ceremonies became more elaborate as time went on,
with longer speeches and larger cakes. I remember the souvenir I was given by
the artillery guard at one of them: the shell casing of a 40mm round, still
warm and smelling like powdered hell, which had just been fired in a salute in
Pop’s honor.

Then there’s my father, Lon, who at the time of my birth was a chief petty
officer at the Coast Guard’s Aviation Technical Training Center in Elizabeth
City, working as a curriculum designer and electronics instructor. He was
often away, leaving my mother at home to raise my sister and me. To give us a
sense of responsibility, she gave us chores; to teach us how to read, she
labeled all our dresser drawers with their contents—SOCKS, UNDERWEAR. She
would load us into our Red Flyer wagon and tow us to the local library, where
I immediately made for my favorite section, the one that I called “Big
Masheens.” Whenever my mother asked me if I was interested in any specific
“Big Masheen,” I was unstoppable: “Dump trucks and steamrollers and forklifts
and cranes and—”

“Is that all, buddy?”

“Oh,” I’d say, “and also cement mixers and bulldozers and—”

My mother loved giving me math challenges. At Kmart or Winn-Dixie, she’d have
me pick out books and model cars and trucks and buy them for me if I was able
to mentally add together their prices. Over the course of my childhood, she
kept escalating the difficulty, first having me estimate and round to the
nearest dollar, then having me figure out the precise dollar-and-cents amount,
and then having me calculate 3 percent of that amount and add it on to the
total. I was confused by that last challenge—not by the arithmetic so much as
by the reasoning. “Why?”

“It’s called tax,” my mother explained. “Everything we buy, we have to pay
three percent to the government.”

“What do they do with it?”

“You like roads, buddy? You like bridges?” she said. “The government uses that
money to fix them. They use that money to fill the library with books.”

Some time later, I was afraid that my budding math skills had failed me, when
my mental totals didn’t match those on the cash register’s display. But once
again, my mother explained. “They raised the sales tax. Now you have to add
four percent.”

“So now the library will get even more books?” I asked.

“Let’s hope,” my mother said.

My grandmother lived a few streets over from us, across from the Carolina Feed
and Seed Mill and a towering pecan tree. After stretching out my shirt to make
a basket to fill with fallen pecans, I’d go up to her house and lie on the
carpet beside the long low bookshelves. My usual company was an edition of
_Aesop’s Fables_ and, perhaps my favorite, _Bulfinch’s Mythology_. I would
leaf through the pages, pausing only to crack a few nuts while I absorbed
accounts of flying horses, intricate labyrinths, and serpent-haired Gorgons
who turned mortals to stone. I was in awe of Odysseus, and liked Zeus, Apollo,
Hermes, and Athena well enough, but the deity I admired most had to be
Hephaestus: the ugly god of fire, volcanoes, blacksmiths, and carpenters, the
god of tinkerers. I was proud of being able to spell his Greek name, and of
knowing that his Roman name, Vulcan, was used for the home planet of Spock
from _Star Trek_. The fundamental premise of the Greco-Roman pantheon always
stuck with me. Up at the summit of some mountain there was this gang of gods
and goddesses who spent most of their infinite existence fighting with each
other and spying on the business of humanity. Occasionally, when they noticed
something that intrigued or disturbed them, they disguised themselves, as
lambs and swans and lions, and descended the slopes of Olympus to investigate
and meddle. It was often a disaster—someone always drowned, or was struck by
lightning, or was turned into a tree—whenever the immortals sought to impose
their will and interfere in mortal affairs.

Once, I picked up an illustrated version of the legends of King Arthur and his
knights, and found myself reading about another legendary mountain, this one
in Wales. It served as the fortress of a tyrannical giant named Rhitta Gawr,
who refused to accept that the age of his reign had passed and that in the
future the world would be ruled by human kings, whom he considered tiny and
weak. Determined to keep himself in power, he descended from his peak,
attacking kingdom after kingdom and vanquishing their armies. Eventually he
managed to defeat and kill every single king of Wales and Scotland. Upon
killing them he shaved off their beards and wove them together into a cloak,
which he wore as a gory trophy. Then he decided to challenge the strongest
king of Britain, King Arthur, giving him a choice: Arthur could either shave
off his own beard and surrender, or Rhitta Gawr would decapitate the king and
remove the beard himself. Enraged at this hubris, Arthur set off for Rhitta
Gawr’s mountain fortress. The king and the giant met on the highest peak and
battled each other for days, until Arthur was gravely wounded. Just as Rhitta
Gawr grabbed the king by the hair and prepared to cut off his head, Arthur
summoned a last measure of strength and sank his fabled sword through the eye
of the giant, who toppled over dead. Arthur and his knights then went about
piling up a funeral cairn atop Rhitta Gawr’s corpse, but before they could
complete the work, snow began to fall. As they departed, the giant’s
bloodstained beard-cloak was returned to perfect whiteness.

The mountain was called Snaw Dun, which, a note explained, was Old English for
“snow mound.” Today, Snaw Dun is called Mount Snowdon. A long-extinct volcano,
it is, at approximately 3,560 feet, the highest peak in Wales. I remember the
feeling of encountering my name in this context—it was thrilling—and the
archaic spelling gave me my first palpable sense that the world was older than
I was, even older than my parents were. The name’s association with the heroic
exploits of Arthur and Lancelot and Gawain and Percival and Tristan and the
other Knights of the Round Table gave me pride—until I learned that these
exploits weren’t historical, but legendary.

Years later, with my mother’s help, I would scour the library in the hopes of
separating the mythical from the factual. I found out that Stirling Castle in
Scotland had been renamed Snowdon Castle, in honor of this Arthurian victory,
as part of an attempt by the Scots to shore up their claim to the throne of
England. Reality, I learned, is nearly always messier and less flattering than
we might want it to be, but also in some strange way often richer than the
myths.

By the time I uncovered the truth about Arthur, I had long been obsessed with
a new and different type of story, or a new and different type of
storytelling. On Christmas 1989, a Nintendo appeared in the house. I took to
that two-tone-gray console so completely that my alarmed mother imposed a
rule: I could only rent a new game when I finished reading a book. Games were
expensive, and, having already mastered the ones that had come with the
console—a single cartridge combining _Super Mario Bros_. and _Duck Hunt_ —I
was eager for other challenges. The only snag was that, at six years old, I
couldn’t read as fast as I could complete a game. It was time for another of
my neophyte hacks. I started coming home from the library with shorter books,
and books with lots of pictures. There were visual encyclopedias of
inventions, with crazy drawings of velocipedes and blimps, and comic books
that I realized only later were abridged, for-kids versions of Jules Verne and
H. G. Wells.

It was the NES—the janky but genius 8-bit Nintendo Entertainment System—that
was my real education. From _The Legend of Zelda_ , I learned that the world
exists to be explored; from _Mega Man_ , I learned that my enemies have much
to teach; and from _Duck Hunt_ , well, _Duck Hunt_ taught me that even if
someone laughs at your failures, it doesn’t mean you get to shoot them in the
face. Ultimately, though, it was _Super Mario Bros._ that taught me what
remains perhaps the most important lesson of my life. I am being perfectly
sincere. I am asking you to consider this seriously. _Super Mario Bros._ , the
1.0 edition, is perhaps the all-time masterpiece of side-scrolling games. When
the game begins, Mario is standing all the way to the left of the legendary
opening screen, and he can only go in one direction: He can only move to the
right, as new scenery and enemies scroll in from that side. He progresses
through eight worlds of four levels each, all of them governed by time
constraints, until he reaches the evil Bowser and frees the captive Princess
Toadstool. Throughout all thirty-two levels, Mario exists in front of what in
gaming parlance is called “an invisible wall,” which doesn’t allow him to go
backward. There is no turning back, only going forward—for Mario and Luigi,
for me, and for you. Life only scrolls in one direction, which is the
direction of time, and no matter how far we might manage to go, that invisible
wall will always be just behind us, cutting us off from the past, compelling
us on into the unknown. A small kid growing up in small-town North Carolina in
the 1980s has to get a sense of mortality from somewhere, so why not from two
Italian-immigrant plumber brothers with an appetite for sewer mushrooms?

One day my much-used _Super Mario Bros._ cartridge wasn’t loading, no matter
how much I blew into it. That’s what you had to do back then, or what we
thought you had to do: you had to blow into the open mouth of the cartridge to
clear it of the dust, debris, and pet hair that tended to accumulate there.
But no matter how much I blew, both into the cartridge and into the cartridge
slot of the console itself, the TV screen was full of blotches and waves,
which were not reassuring in the least.

In retrospect, the Nintendo was probably just suffering from a faulty pin
connection, but given that my seven-year-old self didn’t even know what a pin
connection was, I was frustrated and desperate. Worst of all, my father had
only just left on a Coast Guard trip and wouldn’t be back to help me fix it
for two weeks. I knew of no Mario-style time-warping tricks or pipes to dive
into that would make those weeks pass quicker, so I resolved to fix the thing
myself. If I succeeded, I knew my father would be impressed. I went out to the
garage to find his gray metal toolbox.

I decided that to figure out what was wrong with the thing, first I had to
take it apart. Basically, I was just copying, or trying to copy, the same
motions that my father went through whenever he sat at the kitchen table
repairing the house’s VCR or cassette deck—the two household machines that, to
my eye, the Nintendo console most closely resembled. It took me about an hour
to dismantle the console, with my uncoordinated and very small hands trying to
twist a flat screwdriver into Philips-head screws, but eventually I succeeded.

The console’s exterior was a dull, monochrome gray, but the interior was a
welter of colors. It seemed like there was an entire rainbow of wires and
glints of silver and gold jutting out of the green-as-grass circuitboard. I
tightened a few things here, loosened a few things there—more or less at
random—and blew on every part. After that, I wiped them all down with a paper
towel. Then I had to blow on the circuitboard again to remove the bits of
paper towel that had gotten stuck to what I now know were the pins.

Once I’d finished my cleaning and repairs, it was time for reassembly. Our
golden Lab, Treasure, might have swallowed one of the tiny screws, or maybe it
just got lost in the carpet or under the couch. And I must not have put all
the components back in the same way I’d found them, because they barely fit
into the console’s shell. The shell’s lid kept popping off, so I found myself
squeezing the components down, the way you try to shut an overstuffed
suitcase. Finally the lid snapped into place, but only on one side. The other
side bulged up, and snapping that side into place only caused the first side
to bulge. I went back and forth like that for a while, until I finally gave up
and plugged the unit in again.

I pressed the Power button—and nothing. I pressed the Reset button—and
nothing. Those were the only two buttons on the console. Before my repairs,
the light next to the buttons had always glowed molten red, but now even that
was dead. The console just sat there lopsided and useless, and I felt a surge
of guilt and dread.

My father, when he came home from his Coast Guard trip, wasn’t going to be
proud of me: he was going to jump on my head like a Goomba. But it wasn’t his
anger I feared so much as his disappointment. To his peers, my father was a
master electronics systems engineer who specialized in avionics. To me, he was
a household mad scientist who’d try to fix everything himself—electrical
outlets, dishwashers, hot-water heaters, and AC units. I’d work as his helper
whenever he’d let me, and in the process I’d come to know both the physical
pleasures of manual work and the intellectual pleasures of basic mechanics,
along with the fundamental principles of electronics—the differences between
voltage and current, between power and resistance. Every job we undertook
together would end either in a successful act of repair or a curse, as my
father would fling the unsalvageable piece of equipment across the room and
into the cardboard box of things-that-can’t-be-unbroken. I never judged him
for these failures—I was always too impressed by the fact that he had dared to
hazard an attempt.

When he returned home and found out what I’d done to the NES, he wasn’t angry,
much to my surprise. He wasn’t exactly pleased, either, but he was patient. He
explained that understanding why and how things had gone wrong was every bit
as important as understanding what component had failed: figuring out the why
and how would let you prevent the same malfunction from happening again in the
future. He pointed to each of the console’s parts in turn, explaining not just
what it was, but what it did, and how it interacted with all the other parts
to contribute to the correct working of the mechanism. Only by analyzing a
mechanism in its individual parts were you able to determine whether its
design was the most efficient to achieve its task. If it was the most
efficient, just malfunctioning, then you fixed it. But if not, then you made
modifications to improve the mechanism. This was the only proper protocol for
repair jobs, according to my father, and nothing about it was optional—in
fact, this was the fundamental responsibility you had to technology.

Like all my father’s lessons, this one had broad applications beyond our
immediate task. Ultimately, it was a lesson in the principle of self-reliance,
which my father insisted that America had forgotten sometime between his own
childhood and mine. Ours was now a country in which the cost of replacing a
broken machine with a newer model was typically lower than the cost of having
it fixed by an expert, which itself was typically lower than the cost of
sourcing the parts and figuring out how to fix it yourself. This fact alone
virtually guaranteed technological tyranny, which was perpetuated not by the
technology itself but by the ignorance of everyone who used it daily and yet
failed to understand it. To refuse to inform yourself about the basic
operation and maintenance of the equipment you depended on was to passively
accept that tyranny and agree to its terms: when your equipment works, you’ll
work, but when your equipment breaks down you’ll break down, too. Your
possessions would possess you.

It turned out that I had probably just broken a solder joint, but to find out
exactly which one, my father wanted to use special test equipment that he had
access to at his laboratory at the Coast Guard base. I suppose he could have
brought the test equipment home with him, but for some reason he brought me to
work instead. I think he just wanted to show me his lab. He’d decided I was
ready.

I wasn’t. I’d never been anywhere so impressive. Not even the library. Not
even the Radio Shack at the Lynnhaven Mall. What I remember most are the
screens. The lab itself was dim and empty, the standard-issue beige and white
of government construction, but even before my father hit the lights I
couldn’t help but be transfixed by the pulsating glow of electric green. _Why
does this place have so many TVs?_ was my first thought, quickly followed up
by, _And why are they all tuned to the same channel?_ My father explained that
these weren’t TVs but computers, and though I’d heard the word before, I
didn’t know what it meant. I think I initially assumed that the screens—the
monitors—were the computers themselves.

He went on to show them to me, one by one, and tried to explain what they did:
this one processed radar signals, and that one relayed radio transmissions,
and yet another one simulated the electronic systems on aircraft. I won’t
pretend that I understood even half of it. These computers were more advanced
than nearly everything in use at that time in the private sector, far ahead of
almost anything I had ever imagined. Sure, their processing units took a full
five minutes to boot, their displays only showed one color, and they had no
speakers for sound effects or music. But those limitations only marked them as
serious.

My father plopped me down in a chair, raising it until I could just about
reach the desk, and the rectangular hunk of plastic that was on it. For the
first time in my life, I found myself in front of a keyboard. My father had
never let me type on his Commodore 64, and my screen time had been restricted
to video game consoles with their purpose-built controllers. But these
computers were professional, general-purpose machines, not gaming devices, and
I didn’t understand how to make them work. There was no controller, no
joystick, no gun—the only interface was that flat hunk of plastic set with
rows of keys printed with letters and numbers. The letters were even arranged
in a different order than the one that I’d been taught at school. The first
letter was not A but Q, followed by W, E, R, T, and Y. At least the numbers
were in the same order in which I’d learned them.

My father told me that every key on the keyboard had a purpose—every letter,
every number—and that their combinations had purposes, too. And just like with
the buttons on a controller or joystick, if you could figure out the right
combinations, you could work miracles. To demonstrate, he reached over me,
typed a command, and pressed the Enter key. Something popped up on-screen that
I now know is called a text editor. Then he grabbed a Post-it note and a pen
and scribbled out some letters and numbers, and told me to type them up
exactly while he went off to repair the broken Nintendo.

The moment he was gone, I began reproducing his scribbles on-screen by pecking
away at the keys. A left-handed kid raised to be a rightie, I immediately
found this to be the most natural method of writing I’d ever encountered.

10 INPUT “WHAT IS YOUR NAME?”; NAME$

20 PRINT “HELLO, “+ NAME$ + “!”

It may sound easy to you, but you’re not a young child. I was. I was a young
child with chubby, stubby fingers who didn’t even know what quotation marks
were, let alone that I had to hold down the Shift key in order to type them.
After a whole lot of trial, and a whole lot of error, I finally succeeded in
finishing the file. I pressed Enter and, in a flash, the computer was asking
me a question: WHAT IS YOUR NAME?

I was fascinated. The note didn’t say what I was supposed do next, so I
decided to answer, and pressed my new friend Enter once more. Suddenly, out of
nowhere, HELLO, EDDIE! wrote itself on-screen in a radioactive green that
floated atop the blackness.

This was my introduction to programming and to computing in general: a lesson
in the fact that these machines do what they do because somebody tells them
to, in a very special, very careful way. And that somebody can even be seven
years old.

Almost immediately, I grasped the limitations of gaming systems. They were
stifling in comparison to computer systems. Nintendo, Atari, Sega—they all
confined you to levels and worlds that you could advance through, even defeat,
but never change. The repaired Nintendo console went back to the den, where my
father and I competed in two-player _Mario Kart_ , _Double Dragon_ , and
_Street Fighter_. By that point, I was significantly better than him at all
those games—the first pursuit at which I proved more adept than my father—but
every so often I’d let him beat me. I didn’t want him to think that I wasn’t
grateful.

I’m not a natural programmer, and I’ve never considered myself any good at it.
But I did, over the next decade or so, become good enough to be dangerous. To
this day, I still find the process magical: typing in the commands in all
these strange languages that the processor then translates into an experience
that’s available not just to me but to everyone. I was fascinated by the
thought that one individual programmer could code something universal,
something bound by no laws or rules or regulations except those essentially
reducible to cause and effect. There was an utterly logical relationship
between my input and the output. If my input was flawed, the output was
flawed; if my input was flawless, the computer’s output was, too. I’d never
before experienced anything so consistent and fair, so unequivocally unbiased.
A computer would wait forever to receive my command but would process it the
very moment I hit Enter, no questions asked. No teacher had ever been so
patient, yet so responsive. Nowhere else—certainly not at school, and not even
at home—had I ever felt so in control. That a perfectly written set of
commands would perfectly execute the same operations time and again would come
to seem to me—as it did to so many smart, tech-inclined children of the
millennium—the one stable saving truth of our generation.

