<!-- order:10 -->
# American Online

It was soon after we moved to Crofton that my father brought home our first
desktop computer, a Compaq Presario 425, list price $1,399 but purchased at
his military discount, and initially set up—much to my mother’s chagrin—smack
in the middle of the dining-room table. From the moment it appeared, the
computer and I were inseparable. If previously I’d been loath to go outside
and kick around a ball, now the very idea seemed ludicrous. There was no
outside greater than what I could find inside this drab clunky PC clone, with
what felt at the time like an impossibly fast 25-megahertz Intel 486 CPU and
an inexhaustible 200-megabyte hard disk. Also, get this, it had a color
monitor—an 8-bit color monitor, to be precise, which means that it could
display up to 256 different colors. (Your current device can probably display
in the millions.)

This Compaq became my constant companion—my second sibling, and first love. It
came into my life just at the age when I was first discovering an independent
self and the multiple worlds that can simultaneously exist within this world.
That process of exploration was so exciting that it made me take for granted
and even neglect, for a while at least, the family and life that I already
had. Another way of saying this is, I was just experiencing the early throes
of puberty. But this was a technologized puberty, and the tremendous changes
that it wrought in me were, in a way, being wrought everywhere, in everyone.

My parents would call my name to tell me to get ready for school, but I
wouldn’t hear them. They’d call my name to tell me to wash up for dinner, but
I’d pretend not to hear them. And whenever I was reminded that the computer
was a shared computer and not my personal machine, I’d relinquish my seat with
such reluctance that as my father, or mother, or sister took their turn,
they’d have to order me out of the room entirely lest I hover moodily over
their shoulders and offer advice—showing my sister word-processing macros and
shortcuts when she was writing a research paper, or giving my parents
spreadsheet tips when they tried to do their taxes.

I’d try to rush them through their tasks, so I could get back to mine, which
were so much more important—like playing _Loom_. As technology had advanced,
games involving Pong paddles and helicopters—the kind my father had played on
that by now superannuated Commodore—had lost ground to ones that realized that
at the heart of every computer user was a book reader, a being with the desire
not just for sensation but for story. The crude Nintendo, Atari, and Sega
games of my childhood, with plots along the lines of (and this is a real
example) rescuing the president of the United States from ninjas, now gave way
to detailed reimaginings of the ancient tales that I’d paged through while
lying on the carpet of my grandmother’s house.

_Loom_ was about a society of Weavers whose elders (named after the Greek
Fates Clotho, Lachesis, and Atropos) create a secret loom that controls the
world, or, according to the script of the game, that weaves “subtle patterns
of influence into the very fabric of reality.” When a young boy discovers the
loom’s power, he’s forced into exile, and everything spirals into chaos until
the world decides that a secret fate machine might not be such a great idea,
after all.

Unbelievable, sure. But then again, it’s just a game.

Still, it wasn’t lost on me, even at that young age, that the titular machine
of the game was a symbol of sorts for the computer on which I was playing it.
The loom’s rainbow-colored threads were like the computer’s rainbow-colored
internal wires, and the lone gray thread that foretold an uncertain future was
like the long gray phone cord that came out of the back of the computer and
connected it to the great wide world beyond. There, for me, was the true
magic: with just this cord, the Compaq’s expansion card and modem, and a
working phone, I could dial up and connect to something new called the
Internet.

Readers who were born postmillennium might not understand the fuss, but trust
me, this was a goddamned miracle. Nowadays, connectivity is just presumed.
Smartphones, laptops, desktops, everything’s connected, always. Connected to
what exactly? How? It doesn’t matter. You just tap the icon your older
relatives call “the Internet button” and boom, you’ve got it: the news, pizza
delivery, streaming music, and streaming video that we used to call TV and
movies. Back then, however, we walked uphill both ways, to and from school,
and plugged our modems directly into the wall, with manly twelve-year-old
hands.

I’m not saying that I knew much about what the Internet was, or how exactly I
was connecting to it, but I did understand the miraculousness of it all.
Because in those days, when you told the computer to connect, you were setting
off an entire process wherein the computer would beep and hiss like a traffic
jam of snakes, after which—and it could take lifetimes, or at least whole
minutes—you could pick up any other phone in the house on an extension line
and actually _hear the computers talking_. You couldn’t actually understand
what they were saying to each other, of course, since they were speaking in a
machine language that transmitted up to fourteen thousand symbols per second.
Still, even that incomprehension was an astonishingly clear indication that
phone calls were no longer just for older teenage sisters.

Internet access, and the emergence of the Web, was my generation’s big bang or
Precambrian explosion. It irrevocably altered the course of my life, as it did
the lives of everyone. From the age of twelve or so, I tried to spend my every
waking moment online. Whenever I couldn’t, I was busy planning my next
session. The Internet was my sanctuary; the Web became my jungle gym, my
treehouse, my fortress, my classroom without walls. If it were possible, I
became more sedentary. If it were possible, I became more pale. Gradually, I
stopped sleeping at night and instead slept by day in school. My grades went
back into free fall.

I wasn’t worried by this academic setback, however, and I’m not sure that my
parents were, either. After all, the education that I was getting online
seemed better and even more practical for my future career prospects than
anything provided by school. That, at least, was what I kept telling my mother
and father.

My curiosity felt as vast as the Internet itself: a limitless space that was
growing exponentially, adding webpages by the day, by the hour, by the minute,
on subjects I knew nothing about, on subjects I’d never heard of before—yet
the moment that I did hear about them, I’d develop an insatiable desire to
understand them in their every detail, with few rests or snacks or even toilet
breaks allowed. My appetite wasn’t limited to serious tech subjects like how
to fix a CD-ROM drive, of course. I also spent plenty of time on gaming sites
searching for god-mode cheat codes for _Doom_ and _Quake._ But I was generally
just so overwhelmed by the sheer amount of information immediately available
that I’m not sure I was able to say where one subject ended and another began.
A crash course on how to build my own computer led to a crash course in
processor architecture, with side excursions into information about martial
arts, guns, sports cars, and—full disclosure—softcore-ish goth-y porn.

I sometimes had the feeling that I had to know everything and wasn’t going to
sign off until I did. It was like I was in a race with the technology, in the
same way that some of the teenage boys around me were in a race with one
another to see who’d grow the tallest, or who’d get facial hair first. At
school I was surrounded by kids, some from foreign countries, who were just
trying to fit in and would expend enormous effort to seem cool, to keep up
with the trends. But owning the latest No Fear hat and knowing how to bend its
brim was child’s play—literally, child’s play—compared to what I was doing. I
found it so thoroughly demanding to keep pace with all of the sites and how-to
tutorials I followed that I started to resent my parents whenever they—in
response to a particularly substandard report card or a detention I
received—would force me off the computer on a school night. I couldn’t bear to
have those privileges revoked, disturbed by the thought that every moment that
I wasn’t online more and more material was appearing that I’d be missing.
After repeated parental warnings and threats of grounding, I’d finally relent
and print out whatever file I was reading and bring the dot-matrix pages up to
bed. I’d continue studying in hard copy until my parents had gone to bed
themselves, and then I’d tiptoe out into the dark, wary of the squeaky door
and the creaky floorboards by the stairs. I’d keep the lights off and, guiding
myself by the glow of the screen saver, I’d wake the computer up and go
online, holding my pillows against the machine to stifle the dial tone of the
modem and the ever-intensifying hiss of its connection.

How can I explain it, to someone who wasn’t there? My younger readers, with
their younger standards, might think of the nascent Internet as way too slow,
the nascent Web as too ugly and un-entertaining. But that would be wrong. Back
then, being online was another life, considered by most to be separate and
distinct from Real Life. The virtual and the actual had not yet merged. And it
was up to each individual user to determine for themselves where one ended and
the other began.

It was precisely this that was so inspiring: the freedom to imagine something
entirely new, the freedom to start over. Whatever Web 1.0 might’ve lacked in
user-friendliness and design sensibility, it more than made up for by its
fostering of experimentation and originality of expression, and by its
emphasis on the creative primacy of the individual. A typical GeoCities site,
for example, might have a flashing background that alternated between green
and blue, with white text scrolling like an exclamatory chyron across the
middle—Read _This_ First!!!—below the .gif of a dancing hamster. But to me,
all these kludgy quirks and tics of amateur production merely indicated that
the guiding intelligence behind the site was human, and unique. Computer
science professors and systems engineers, moonlighting English majors and
mouth-breathing, basement-dwelling armchair political economists were all only
too happy to share their research and convictions—not for any financial
reward, but merely to win converts to their cause. And whether that cause was
PC or Mac, macrobiotic diets or the abolition of the death penalty, I was
interested. I was interested because they were enthused. Many of these strange
and brilliant people could even be contacted and were quite pleased to answer
my questions via the forms (“click this hyperlink or copy and paste it into
your browser”) and email addresses (@usenix.org, @frontier.net) provided on
their sites.

As the millennium approached, the online world would become increasingly
centralized and consolidated, with both governments and businesses
accelerating their attempts to intervene in what had always been a
fundamentally peer-to-peer relationship. But for one brief and beautiful
stretch of time—a stretch that, fortunately for me, coincided almost exactly
with my adolescence—the Internet was mostly made of, by, and for the people.
Its purpose was to enlighten, not to monetize, and it was administered more by
a provisional cluster of perpetually shifting collective norms than by
exploitative, globally enforceable terms of service agreements. To this day, I
consider the 1990s online to have been the most pleasant and successful
anarchy I’ve ever experienced.

I was especially involved with the Web-based bulletin-board systems or BBSes.
On these, you could pick a username and type out whatever message you wanted
to post, either adding to a preexisting group discussion or starting a new
one. Any and all messages that replied to your post would be organized by
thread. Imagine the longest email chain you’ve ever been on, but in public.
These were also chat applications, like Internet Relay Chat, which provided an
immediate-gratification instant-message version of the same experience. There
you could discuss any topic in real time, or at least as close to real time as
a telephone conversation, live radio, or TV news.

Most of the messaging and chatting I did was in search of answers to questions
I had about how to build my own computer, and the responses I received were so
considered and thorough, so generous and kind, they’d be unthinkable today. My
panicked query about why a certain chipset for which I’d saved up my allowance
didn’t seem to be compatible with the motherboard I’d already gotten for
Christmas would elicit a two-thousand-word explanation and note of advice from
a professional tenured computer scientist on the other side of the country.
Not cribbed from any manual, this response was composed expressly for me, to
troubleshoot my problems step-by-step until I’d solved them. I was twelve
years old, and my correspondent was an adult stranger far away, yet he treated
me like an equal because I’d shown respect for the technology. I attribute
this civility, so far removed from our current social-media sniping, to the
high bar for entry at the time. After all, the only people on these boards
were the people who could be there—who wanted to be there badly enough—who had
the proficiency and passion, because the Internet of the 1990s wasn’t just one
click away. It took significant effort just to log on.

Once, a certain BBS that I was on tried to coordinate casual in-the-flesh
meetings of its regular members throughout the country: in DC, in New York, at
the Consumer Electronics Show in Las Vegas. After being pressured rather hard
to attend—and promised extravagant evenings of eating and drinking—I finally
just told everyone how old I was. I was afraid that some of my correspondents
might stop interacting with me, but instead they became, if anything, even
more encouraging. I was sent updates from the electronics show and images of
its catalog; one guy offered to ship me secondhand computer parts through the
mail, free of charge.

* * *

I MIGHT HAVE told the BBSers my age, but I never told them my name, because
one of the greatest joys of these platforms was that on them I didn’t have to
be who I was. I could be anybody. The anonymizing or pseudonymizing features
brought equilibrium to all relationships, correcting their imbalances. I could
take cover under virtually any handle, or “nym,” as they were called, and
suddenly become an older, taller, manlier version of myself. I could even be
multiple selves. I took advantage of this feature by asking what I sensed were
my more amateur questions on what seemed to me the more amateur boards, under
different personas each time. My computer skills were improving so swiftly
that instead of being proud of all the progress I’d made, I was embarrassed by
my previous ignorance and wanted to distance myself from it. I wanted to
disassociate my selves. I’d tell myself that squ33ker had been so dumb when
“he” had asked that question about chipset compatibility way back, long ago,
last Wednesday.

For all of this cooperative, collectivist free-culture ethos, I’m not going to
pretend that the competition wasn’t merciless, or that the population—almost
uniformly male, heterosexual, and hormonally charged—didn’t occasionally erupt
into cruel and petty squabbles. But in the absence of real names, the people
who claimed to hate you weren’t real people. They didn’t know anything about
you beyond what you argued, and how you argued it. If, or rather when, one of
your arguments incurred some online wrath, you could simply drop that screen
name and assume another mask, under the cover of which you could even join in
the mimetic pile-on, beating up on your disowned avatar as if it were a
stranger. I can’t tell you what sweet relief that sometimes was.

In the 1990s, the Internet had yet to fall victim to the greatest iniquity in
digital history: the move by both government and businesses to link, as
intimately as possible, users’ online personas to their offline legal
identity. Kids used to be able to go online and say the dumbest things one day
without having to be held accountable for them the next. This might not strike
you as the healthiest environment in which to grow up, and yet it is precisely
the only environment in which you _can_ grow up—by which I mean that the early
Internet’s dissociative opportunities actually encouraged me and those of my
generation to change our most deeply held opinions, instead of just digging in
and defending them when challenged. This ability to reinvent ourselves meant
that we never had to close our minds by picking sides, or close ranks out of
fear of doing irreparable harm to our reputations. Mistakes that were swiftly
punished but swiftly rectified allowed both the community and the “offender”
to move on. To me, and to many, this felt like freedom.

Imagine, if you will, that you could wake up every morning and pick a new name
and a new face by which to be known to the world. Imagine that you could
choose a new voice and new words to speak in it, as if the “Internet button”
were actually a reset button for your life. In the new millennium, Internet
technology would be turned to very different ends: enforcing fidelity to
memory, identarian consistency, and so ideological conformity. But back then,
for a while at least, it protected us by forgetting our transgressions and
forgiving our sins.

My most significant early encounters with online self-presentation happened
not on BBSes, however, but in a more fantastical realm: the pseudo-feudal
lands and dungeons of role-playing games, MMORPGs (massively multiplayer
online role-playing games) in particular. In order to play _Ultima Online_ ,
which was my favorite MMORPG, I had to create and assume an alternative
identity, or “alt.” I could choose, for example, to be a wizard or warrior, a
tinkerer or thief, and I could toggle between these alts with a freedom that
was unavailable to me in off-line life, whose institutions tend to regard all
mutability as suspicious.

I’d roam the _Ultima_ gamescape as one of my alts, interacting with the alts
of others. As I got to know these other alts, by collaborating with them on
certain quests, I’d sometimes come to realize that I’d met their users before,
just under different identities, while they, in turn, might realize the same
about me. They’d read my messages and figure out, through a characteristic
phrase I’d used, or a particular quest that I’d suggest, that I—who was
currently, say, a knight who called herself Shrike—was also, or had also been,
a bard who called himself Corwin, and a smith who called himself Belgarion.
Sometimes I just enjoyed these interactions as opportunities for banter, but
more often than not I treated them competitively, measuring my success by
whether I was able to identify more of another user’s alts than they were able
to identify of mine. These contests to determine whether I could unmask others
without being unmasked myself required me to be careful not to fall into any
messaging patterns that might expose me, while simultaneously engaging others
and remaining alert to the ways in which they might inadvertently reveal their
true identities.

While the alts of _Ultima_ were multifarious in name, they were essentially
stabilized by the nature of their roles, which were well defined, even
archetypal, and so enmeshed within the game’s established social order as to
make playing them sometimes feel like discharging a civic duty. After a day at
school or at a job that might seem purposeless and unrewarding, it could feel
as if you were performing a useful service by spending the evening as a healer
or shepherd, a helpful alchemist or mage. The relative stability of the
_Ultima_ universe—its continued development according to defined laws and
codes of conduct—ensured that each alt had their role-specific tasks, and
would be judged according to their ability, or willingness, to complete them
and fulfill the societal expectations of their function.

I loved these games and the alternative lives they let me live, though love
wasn’t quite as liberating for the other members of my family. Games,
especially of the massively multiplayer variety, are notoriously time-
consuming, and I was spending so many hours playing _Ultima_ that our phone
bills were becoming exorbitant and no calls were getting through. The line was
always busy. My sister, now deep into her teen years, became furious when she
found out that my online life had caused her to miss some crucial high-school
gossip. However, it didn’t take her long to figure out that all she had to do
to get her revenge was pick up the phone, which would break the Internet
connection. The modem’s hiss would stop, and before she’d even received a
normal dial tone, I’d be screaming my head off downstairs.

If you’re interrupted in the middle of, say, reading the news online, you can
always go back and pick up wherever you left off. But if you’re interrupted
while playing a game that you can’t pause or save—because a hundred thousand
others are playing it at the same time—you’re ruined. You could be on top of
the world, some legendary dragon-slayer with your own castle and an army, but
after just thirty seconds of CONNECTION LOST you’d find yourself reconnecting
to a bone-gray screen that bore a cruel epitaph: YOU ARE DEAD.

I’m a bit embarrassed nowadays at how seriously I took all of this, but I
can’t avoid the fact that I felt, at the time, as if my sister was intent on
destroying my life—particularly on those occasions when she’d make sure to
catch my eye from across the room and smile before picking up the downstairs
receiver, not because she wanted to make a phone call but purely because she
wanted to remind me who was boss. Our parents got so fed up with our shouting
matches that they did something uncharacteristically indulgent. They switched
our Internet billing plan from pay-by-the-minute to flat-fee unlimited access,
and installed a second phone line.

Peace smiled upon our abode.

