# X-Rays

I joined the army, as its slogan went, to be all I could be, and also because
it wasn’t the Coast Guard. It didn’t hurt that I’d scored high enough on its
entrance exams to qualify for a chance to come out of training as a Special
Forces sergeant, on a track the recruiters called 18 X-Ray, which was designed
to augment the ranks of the small flexible units that were doing the hardest
fighting in America’s increasingly shadowy and disparate wars. The 18 X-Ray
program was a considerable incentive, because traditionally, before 9/11, I
would’ve had to already be in the army before being given a shot at attending
the Special Forces’ exceedingly demanding qualification courses. The new
system worked by screening prospective soldiers up front, identifying those
with the highest levels of fitness, intelligence, and language-learning
ability—the ones who might make the cut—and using the inducements of special
training and a rapid advance in rank to enlist promising candidates who might
otherwise go elsewhere. I’d put in a couple of months of grueling runs to
prepare—I was in great shape, but I always hated running—before my recruiter
called to say that my paperwork was approved: I was in, I’d made it. I was the
first candidate he’d ever signed up for the program, and I could hear the
pride and cheer in his voice when he told me that after training, I’d probably
be made a Special Forces Communications, Engineering, or Intelligence
sergeant.

Probably.

But first, I had to get through basic training at Fort Benning, Georgia.

I sat next to the same guy the whole way down there, from bus to plane to bus,
Maryland to Georgia. He was enormous, a puffy bodybuilder somewhere between
two and three hundred pounds. He talked nonstop, his conversation alternating
between describing how he’d slap the drill sergeant in the face if he gave him
any lip and recommending the steroid cycles I should take to most effectively
bulk up. I don’t think he took a breath until we arrived at Fort Benning’s
Sand Hill training area—which in hindsight, I have to say, didn’t actually
seem to have that much sand.

The drill sergeants greeted us with withering fury and gave us nicknames based
on our initial infractions and grave mistakes, like getting off the bus
wearing a brightly colored floral-patterned shirt, or having a name that could
be modified slightly into something funnier. Soon I was Snowflake and my
seatmate was Daisy and all he could do was clench his jaw—nobody dared to
clench a fist—and fume.

Once the drill sergeants noticed that Daisy and I were already acquainted, and
that I was the lightest in the platoon, at five foot nine and 124 pounds, and
he the heaviest, they decided to entertain themselves by pairing us together
as often as possible. I still remember the buddy carry, an exercise where you
had to carry your supposedly wounded partner the length of a football field
using a number of different methods like the “neck drag,” the “fireman,” and
the especially comedic “bridal carry.” When I had to carry Daisy, you couldn’t
see me beneath his bulk. It would look like Daisy was floating, though I’d be
under him sweating and cursing, straining to get his gigantic ass to the other
side of the goal line before collapsing myself. Daisy would then get up with a
laugh, drape me around his neck like a damp towel, and go skipping along like
a child in the woods.

We were always dirty and always hurting, but within weeks I was in the best
shape of my life. My slight build, which had seemed like a curse, soon became
an advantage, because so much of what we did were body-weight exercises. Daisy
couldn’t climb a rope, which I scampered up like a chipmunk. He struggled to
lift his incredible bulk above the bar for the bare minimum of pull-ups, while
I could do twice the number with one arm. He could barely manage a handful of
push-ups before breaking a sweat, whereas I could do them with claps, or with
just a single thumb. When we did the two-minute push-up tests, they stopped me
early for maxing the score.

Everywhere we went, we marched—or ran. We ran constantly. Miles before mess,
miles after mess, down roads and fields and around the track, while the drill
sergeant called cadence:

> I went to the desert
>
> where the terrorists run
>
> pulled out my machete
>
> pulled out my gun.
>
> Left, right, left, right—kill kill kill!
>
> Mess with us and you know we will!
>
> I went to the caves
>
> where the terrorists hide
>
> pulled out a grenade
>
> and threw it inside.
>
> Left, right, left, right—kill kill kill!
>
> Mess with us and you know we will!

* * *

RUNNING IN UNIT formation, calling cadence—it lulls you, it puts you outside
yourself, filling your ears with the din of dozens of men echoing your own
shouting voice and forcing your eyes to fix on the footfalls of the runner in
front of you. After a while you don’t think anymore, you merely count, and
your mind dissolves into the rank and file as you pace out mile after mile. I
would say it was serene if it wasn’t so deadening. I would say I was at peace
if I weren’t so tired. This was precisely as the army intended. The drill
sergeant goes unslapped not so much because of fear but because of exhaustion:
he’s never worth the effort. The army makes its fighters by first training the
fight out of them until they’re too weak to care, or to do anything besides
obey.

It was only at night in the barracks that we could get some respite, which we
had to earn by toeing the line in front of our bunks, reciting the Soldier’s
Creed, and then singing “The Star-Spangled Banner.” Daisy would always forget
the words. Also, he was tone-deaf.

Some guys would stay up late talking about what they were going to do to bin
Laden once they found him, and they were all sure they were going to find him.
Most of their fantasies had to do with decapitation, castration, or horny
camels **.** Meanwhile, I’d have dreams about running, not through the lush
and loamy Georgia landscape but through the desert.

Sometime during the third or fourth week we were out on a land navigation
movement, which is when your platoon goes into the woods and treks over
variegated terrain to predetermined coordinates, clambering over boulders and
wading across streams, with just a map and a compass—no GPS, no digital
technology. We’d done versions of this movement before, but never in full kit,
with each of us lugging a rucksack stuffed with around fifty pounds of gear.
Worse still, the raw boots the army had issued me were so wide that I floated
in them. I felt my toes blister even as I set out, loping across the range.

Toward the middle of the movement, I was on point and scrambled atop a storm-
felled tree that arched over the path at about chest height so that I could
shoot an azimuth to check our bearings. After confirming that we were on
track, I went to hop down, but with one foot extended I noticed the coil of a
snake directly below me. I’m not exactly a naturalist, so I don’t know what
species of snake it was, but then again, I didn’t really care. Kids in North
Carolina grow up being told that all snakes are deadly and I wasn’t about to
start doubting it now.

Instead, I started trying to walk on air. I widened the stride of my
outstretched foot, once, twice, twisting for the extra distance, when suddenly
I realized I was falling. When my feet hit the ground, some distance beyond
the snake, a fire shot up my legs that was more painful than any viper bite I
could imagine. A few stumbling steps, which I had to take in order to regain
my balance, told me that something was wrong. Grievously wrong. I was in
excruciating pain, but I couldn’t stop, because I was in the army and the army
was in the middle of the woods. I gathered my resolve, pushed the pain away,
and just focused on maintaining a steady pace—left, right, left, right—relying
on the rhythm to distract me.

It got harder to walk as I went on, and although I managed to tough it out and
finish, the only reason was that I didn’t have a choice. By the time I got
back to the barracks, my legs were numb. My rack, or bunk, was up top, and I
could barely get myself into it. I had to grab its post, hoist up my torso
like I was getting out of a pool, and drag my lower half in after.

The next morning I was torn from a fitful sleep by the clanking of a metal
trash can being thrown down the squad bay, a wake-up call that meant someone
hadn’t done their job to the drill sergeant’s satisfaction. I shot up
automatically, swinging myself over the edge and springing to the floor. When
I landed, my legs gave way. They crumpled and I fell. It was like I had no
legs at all.

I tried to get up, grabbing for the lower bunk to try my hoist-by-the-arms
maneuver again, but as soon as I moved my legs every muscle in my body seized
and I sank down immediately.

Meanwhile a crowd had gathered around me, with laughter that turned to concern
and then to silence as the drill sergeant approached. “What’s the matter with
you, broke-dick?” he said. “Get up off my floor before I make you a part of
it, permanently.” When he saw the agony flash across my face as I immediately
and unwisely struggled to respond to his commands, he put his hand to my chest
to stop me. “Daisy! Get Snowflake here down to the bench.” Then he crouched
down over me, as if he didn’t want the others to hear him being gentle, and
said in a quiet rasp, “As soon as it opens, Private, you’re going to crutch
your broken ass to Sick Call,” which is where the army sends its injured to be
abused by professionals.

There’s a major stigma about getting injured in the army, mostly because the
army is dedicated to making its soldiers feel invincible but also because it
likes to protect itself from accusations of mis-training. This is why almost
all training-injury victims are treated like whiners or, worse, malingerers.

After he carried me down to the bench, Daisy had to go. He wasn’t hurt, and
those of us who were had to be kept separated. We were the untouchables, the
lepers, the soldiers who couldn’t train because of anything from sprains,
lacerations, and burns to broken ankles and deep necrotized spider bites. My
new battle buddies would now come from this bench of shame. A battle buddy is
the person who, by policy, goes everywhere you go, just as you go everywhere
they go, if there’s even the remotest chance that either of you might be
alone. Being alone might lead to thinking, and thinking can cause the army
problems.

The battle buddy assigned to me was a smart, handsome, former catalog model
Captain America type who’d injured his hip about a week earlier but hadn’t
attended to it until the pain had become unbearable and left him just as gimpy
as me. Neither of us felt up to talking, so we crutched along in grim
silence—left, right, left, right, but slowly. At the hospital I was X-rayed
and told that I had bilateral tibial fractures. These are stress fractures,
fissures on the surface of the bones that can deepen with time and pressure
until they crack the bones down to the marrow. The only thing I could do to
help my legs heal was to get off my feet and stay off them. It was with those
orders that I was dismissed from the examination room to get a ride back to
the battalion.

Except I couldn’t go yet, because I couldn’t leave without my battle buddy.
He’d gone in to be X-rayed after me and hadn’t returned. I assumed he was
still being examined, so I waited. And waited. Hours passed. I spent the time
reading newspapers and magazines, an unthinkable luxury for someone in basic
training.

A nurse came over and said my drill sergeant was on the phone at the desk. By
the time I hobbled over to take the call, he was livid. “Snowflake, you
enjoying your reading? Maybe you could get some pudding while you’re at it,
and some copies of _Cosmo_ for the girls? Why in the hell haven’t you two
dirtbags left yet?”

“Drill Sarn”—that’s how everybody said it in Georgia, where my Southern accent
had resurfaced for the moment—“I’m still waiting on my battle buddy, Drill
Sarn.”

“And where the fuck is he, Snowflake?”

“Drill Sarn, I don’t know. He went into the examination room and hasn’t come
out, Drill Sarn.”

He wasn’t happy with the answer, and barked even louder. “Get off your
crippled ass and go fucking find him, goddamnit.”

I got up and crutched over to the intake counter to make inquiries. My battle
buddy, they told me, was in surgery.

It was only toward evening, after a barrage of calls from the drill sergeant,
that I found out what had happened. My battle buddy had been walking around on
a broken hip for the past week, apparently, and if he hadn’t been taken into
surgery immediately and had it screwed back together, he might have been
incapacitated for life. Major nerves could have been severed, because the
break was as sharp as a knife.

I was sent back to Fort Benning alone, back to the bench. Anybody on the bench
for more than three or four days was at serious risk of being
“recycled”—forced to start basic training over from scratch—or, worse, of
being transferred to the Medical Unit and sent home. These were guys who’d
dreamed of being in the army their entire lives, guys for whom the army had
been their only way out of cruel families and dead-end careers, who now had to
face the prospect of failure and a return to civilian life irreparably
damaged.

We were the cast-offs, the walking wounded hellguard who had no other duty
than to sit on a bench in front of a brick wall twelve hours a day. We had
been judged by our injuries as unfit for the army and now had to pay for this
fact by being separated and shunned, as if the drill sergeants feared we’d
contaminate others with our weakness or with the ideas that had occurred to us
while benched. We were punished beyond the pain of our injuries themselves,
excluded from petty joys like watching the fireworks on the Fourth of July.
Instead, we pulled “fire guard” that night for the empty barracks, a task that
involved watching to make sure that the empty building didn’t burn down.

We pulled fire guard two to a shift, and I stood in the dark on my crutches,
pretending to be useful, alongside my partner. He was a sweet, simple, beefy
eighteen-year-old with a dubious, perhaps self-inflicted injury. By his own
account, he should never have enlisted to begin with. The fireworks were
bursting in the distance while he told me how much of a mistake he’d made, and
how agonizingly lonely he was—how much he missed his parents and his home,
their family farm somewhere way out in Appalachia.

I sympathized, though there wasn’t much I could do but send him to speak to
the chaplain. I tried to offer advice, suck it up, it might be better once
you’re used to it. But then he put his bulk in front of me and, in an
endearingly childlike way, told me point-blank that he was going AWOL—a crime
in the military—and asked me whether I would tell anybody. It was only then
that I noticed he’d brought his laundry bag. He meant that he was going AWOL
that very moment.

I wasn’t sure how to deal with the situation, beyond trying to talk some sense
into him. I warned him that going AWOL was a bad idea, that he’d end up with a
warrant out for his arrest and any cop in the country could pick him up for
the rest of his life. But the guy only shook his head. Where he lived, he
said, deep in the mountains, they didn’t even have cops. This, he said, was
his last chance to be free.

I understood, then, that his mind was made up. He was much more mobile than I
was, and he was big. If he ran, I couldn’t chase him; if I tried to stop him,
he might snap me in half. All I could do was report him, but if I did, I’d be
penalized for having let the conversation get this far without calling for
reinforcements and beating him with a crutch.

I was angry. I realized I was yelling at him. Why didn’t he wait until I was
in the latrine to make a break for it? Why was he putting me in this position?

He spoke softly. “You’re the only one who listens,” he said, and began to cry.

The saddest part of that night is that I believed him. In the company of a
quarter thousand, he was alone. We stood in silence as the fireworks popped
and snapped in the distance. I sighed and said, “I’ve got to go to the
latrine. I’m going to be a while.” Then I limped away and didn’t look back.

That was the last I ever saw of him. I think I realized, then and there, that
I wasn’t long for the army, either.

My next doctor’s appointment was merely confirmation.

The doctor was a tall, lanky Southerner with a wry demeanor. After examining
me and a new set of X-rays, he said that I was in no condition to continue
with my company. The next phase of training was airborne, and he told me,
“Son, if you jump on those legs, they’re going to turn into powder.”

I was despondent. If I didn’t finish the basic training cycle on time, I’d
lose my slot in 18X, which meant that I’d be reassigned according to the needs
of the army. They could make me into whatever they wanted: regular infantry, a
mechanic, a desk jockey, a potato peeler, or—in my greatest nightmare—doing IT
at the army’s help desk.

The doctor must have seen how dejected I was, because he cleared his throat
and gave me a choice: I could get recycled and try my luck with reassignment,
or he could write me a note putting me out on what was called “administrative
separation.” This, he explained, was a special type of severance, not
characterized as either honorable or dishonorable, only available to enlistees
who’d been in the services fewer than six months. It was a clean break, more
like an annulment than a divorce, and could be taken care of rather quickly.

I’ll admit, the idea appealed to me. In the back of my mind, I even thought it
might be some kind of karmic reward for the mercy I’d shown to the Appalachian
who’d gone AWOL. The doctor left me to think, and when he came back in an hour
I accepted his offer.

Shortly thereafter I was transferred to the Medical Unit, where I was told
that in order for the administrative separation to go through I had to sign a
statement attesting that I was all better, that my bones were all healed. My
signature was a requirement, but it was presented as a mere formality. Just a
few scribbles and I could go.

As I held the statement in one hand and the pen in the other, a knowing smile
crossed my face. I recognized the hack: what I’d thought was a kind and
generous offer made by a caring army doctor to an ailing enlistee was the
government’s way of avoiding liability and a disability claim. Under the
military’s rules, if I’d received a medical discharge, the government would
have had to pay the bills for any issues stemming from my injury, any
treatments and therapies it required. An administrative discharge put the
burden on me, and my freedom hinged on my willingness to accept that burden.

I signed, and left that same day, on crutches that the army let me keep.

