<!-- order:8 -->
# Beltway Boy

I was just shy of my ninth birthday when my family moved from North Carolina
to Maryland. To my surprise, I found that my name had preceded me. “Snowden”
was everywhere throughout Anne Arundel, the county we settled in, though it
was a while before I learned why.

Richard Snowden was a British major who arrived in the province of Maryland in
1658 with the understanding that Lord Baltimore’s guarantee of religious
freedom for both Catholics and Protestants would also be extended to Quakers.
In 1674, Richard was joined by his brother John, who’d agreed to leave
Yorkshire in order to shorten his prison sentence for preaching the Quaker
faith. When William Penn’s ship, the _Welcome_ , sailed up the Delaware in
1682, John was one of the few Europeans to greet it.

Three of John’s grandsons went on to serve in the Continental Army during the
Revolution. As the Quakers are pacifists, they came in for community censure
for deciding to join the fight for independence, but their conscience demanded
a reconsideration of their pacifism. William Snowden, my direct paternal
ancestor, served as a captain, was taken prisoner by the British in the Battle
of Fort Washington in New York, and died in custody at one of the notorious
sugar house prisons in Manhattan. (Legend has it that the British killed their
POWs by forcing them to eat gruel laced with ground glass.) His wife,
Elizabeth née Moor, was a valued adviser to General Washington, and the mother
to another John Snowden—a politician, historian, and newspaper publisher in
Pennsylvania whose descendants dispersed southward to settle amid the Maryland
holdings of their Snowden cousins.

Anne Arundel County encompasses nearly all of the 1,976 acres of woodland that
King Charles II granted to the family of Richard Snowden in 1686. The
enterprises the Snowdens established there include the Patuxent Iron Works,
one of colonial America’s most important forges and a major manufacturer of
cannonballs and bullets, and Snowden Plantation, a farm and dairy run by
Richard Snowden’s grandsons. After serving in the heroic Maryland Line of the
Continental Army, they returned to the plantation and—most fully living the
principles of independence—abolished their family’s practice of slavery,
freeing their two hundred African slaves nearly a full century before the
Civil War.

Today, the former Snowden fields are bisected by Snowden River Parkway, a busy
four-lane commercial stretch of upmarket chain restaurants and car
dealerships. Nearby, Route 32/Patuxent Freeway leads directly to Fort George
G. Meade, the second-largest army base in the country and the home of the NSA.
Fort Meade, in fact, is built atop land that was once owned by my Snowden
cousins, and that was either bought from them (in one account) or expropriated
from them (according to others) by the US government.

I knew nothing of this history at the time: my parents joked that the state of
Maryland changed the name on the signs every time somebody new moved in. They
thought that was funny but I just found it spooky. Anne Arundel County is only
a bit more than 250 miles away from Elizabeth City via I-95, yet it felt like
a different planet. We’d exchanged the leafy riverside for a concrete
sidewalk, and a school where I’d been popular and academically successful for
one where I was constantly mocked for my glasses, my disinterest in sports,
and, especially, for my accent—a strong Southern drawl that led my new
classmates to call me “retarded.”

I was so sensitive about my accent that I stopped speaking in class and
started practicing alone at home until I managed to sound “normal”—or, at
least, until I managed not to pronounce the site of my humiliation as “Anglish
clay-iss” or say that I’d gotten a paper cut on my “fanger.” Meanwhile, all
that time I’d been afraid to speak freely had caused my grades to plummet, and
some of my teachers decided to have me IQ-tested as a way of diagnosing what
they thought was a learning disability. When my score came back, I don’t
remember getting any apologies, just a bunch of extra “enrichment
assignments.” Indeed, the same teachers who’d doubted my ability to learn now
began to take issue with my newfound interest in speaking up.

My new home was on the Beltway, which traditionally referred to Interstate
495, the highway that encircles Washington, DC, but now describes the vast and
ever-expanding blast radius of bedroom communities around the nation’s
capital, stretching north to Baltimore, Maryland, and south to Quantico,
Virginia. The inhabitants of these suburbs almost invariably either serve in
the US government or work for one of the companies that do business with the
US government. There is, to put it plainly, no other reason to be there.

We lived in Crofton, Maryland, halfway between Annapolis and Washington, DC,
at the western edge of Anne Arundel County, where the residential developments
are all in the vinyl-sided Federalist style and have quaint ye-olde names like
Crofton Towne, Crofton Mews, The Preserve, The Ridings. Crofton itself is a
planned community fitted around the curves of the Crofton Country Club. On a
map, it resembles nothing so much as the human brain, with the streets coiling
and kinking and folding around one another like the ridges and furrows of the
cerebral cortex. Our street was Knights Bridge Turn, a broad, lazy loop of
split-level housing, wide driveways, and two-car garages. The house we lived
in was seven down from one end of the loop, seven down from the other—the
house in the middle. I got a Huffy ten-speed bike and with it, a paper route,
delivering the _Capital_ , a venerable newspaper published in Annapolis, whose
daily distribution became distressingly erratic, especially in the winter,
especially between Crofton Parkway and Route 450, which, as it passed by our
neighborhood, acquired a different name: Defense Highway.

For my parents this was an exciting time. Crofton was a step up for them, both
economically and socially. The streets were tree-lined and pretty much crime-
free, and the multicultural, multiracial, multilingual population, which
reflected the diversity of the Beltway’s diplomatic corps and intelligence
community, was well-to-do and well educated. Our backyard was basically a golf
course, with tennis courts just around the corner, and beyond those an
Olympic-size pool. Commuting-wise, too, Crofton was ideal. It took my father
just forty minutes to get to his new posting as a chief warrant officer in the
Aeronautical Engineering Division at Coast Guard Headquarters, which at the
time was located at Buzzard Point in southern Washington, DC, adjacent to Fort
Lesley J. McNair. And it took my mother just twenty or so minutes to get to
her new job at the NSA, whose boxy futuristic headquarters, topped with
radomes and sheathed in copper to seal in the communications signals, forms
the heart of Fort Meade.

I can’t stress this enough, for outsiders: this type of employment was normal.
Neighbors to our left worked for the Defense Department; neighbors to the
right worked in the Department of Energy and the Department of Commerce. For a
while, nearly every girl at school on whom I had a crush had a father in the
FBI. Fort Meade was just the place where my mother worked, along with about
125,000 other employees, approximately 40,000 of whom resided on-site, many
with their families. The base was home to over 115 government agencies, in
addition to forces from all five branches of the military. To put it in
perspective, in Anne Arundel County, population just over half a million,
every eight hundredth person works for the post office, every thirtieth person
works for the public school system, and every fourth person works for, or
serves in, a business, agency, or branch connected to Fort Meade. The base has
its own post offices, schools, police, and fire departments. Area children,
military brats and civilians alike, would flock to the base daily to take
golf, tennis, and swimming lessons. Though we lived off base, my mother still
used its commissary as our grocery store, to stock up on items in bulk. She
also took advantage of the base’s PX, or Post Exchange, as a one-stop shop for
the sensible and, most important, tax-free clothing that my sister and I were
constantly outgrowing. Perhaps it’s best, then, for readers not raised in this
milieu to imagine Fort Meade and its environs, if not the entire Beltway, as
one enormous boom-or-bust company town. It is a place whose monoculture has
much in common with, say, Silicon Valley’s, except that the Beltway’s product
isn’t technology but government itself.

I should add that both my parents had top secret clearances, but my mother
also had a full-scope polygraph—a higher-level security check that members of
the military aren’t subject to. The funny thing is, my mother was the farthest
thing from a spy. She was a clerk at an independent insurance and benefits
association that serviced employees of the NSA—essentially, providing spies
with retirement plans. But still, to process pension forms she had to be
vetted as if she were about to parachute into a jungle to stage a coup.

My father’s career remains fairly opaque to me to this day, and the fact is
that my ignorance here isn’t anomalous. In the world I grew up in, nobody
really talked about their jobs—not just to children, but to each other. It is
true that many of the adults around me were legally prohibited from discussing
their work, even with their families, but to my mind a more accurate
explanation lies in the technical nature of their labor and the government’s
insistence on compartmentalization. Tech people rarely, if ever, have a sense
of the broader applications and policy implications of the projects to which
they’re assigned. And the work that consumes them tends to require such
specialized knowledge that to bring it up at a barbecue would get them
disinvited from the next one, because nobody cared.

In retrospect, maybe that’s what got us here.

