<!-- order:14 -->
# Incomplete

I don’t remember high school very well, because I spent so much of it asleep,
compensating for all my insomniac nights on the computer. At Arundel High most
of my teachers didn’t mind my little napping habit, and left me alone so long
as I wasn’t snoring, though there were still a cruel, joyless few who
considered it their duty to always wake me—with the screech of chalk or the
clap of erasers—and ambush me with a question: “And what do _you_ think, Mr.
Snowden?”

I’d lift my head off my desk, sit up in my chair, yawn, and—as my classmates
tried to stifle their laughter—I’d have to answer.

The truth is, I loved these moments, which were among the greatest challenges
high school had to offer. I loved being put on the spot, groggy and dazed,
with thirty pairs of eyes and ears trained on me and expecting my failure,
while I searched for a clue on the half-empty blackboard. If I could think
quickly enough to come up with a good answer, I’d be a legend. But if I was
too slow, I could always crack a joke—it’s never too late for a joke. In the
absolute worst case, I’d sputter, and my classmates would think I was stupid.
Let them. You should always let people underestimate you. Because when people
misappraise your intelligence and abilities, they’re merely pointing out their
own vulnerabilities—the gaping holes in their judgment that need to stay open
if you want to cartwheel through later on a flaming horse, correcting the
record with your sword of justice.

When I was a teen, I think I was a touch too enamored of the idea that life’s
most important questions are binary, meaning that one answer is always Right,
and all the rest of the answers are Wrong. I think I was enchanted by the
model of computer programming, whose questions can only be answered in one of
two ways: 1 or 0, the machine-code version of Yes or No, True or False. Even
the multiple-choice questions of my quizzes and tests could be approached
through the oppositional logic of the binary. If I didn’t immediately
recognize one of the possible answers as correct, I could always try to reduce
my choices by a process of elimination, looking for terms such as “always” or
“never” and seeking out invalidating exceptions.

Toward the end of my freshman year, however, I was faced with a very different
kind of assignment—a question that couldn’t be answered by filling in bubbles
with a #2 pencil, but only by rhetoric: full sentences in full paragraphs. In
plain terms, it was an English class assignment, a writing prompt: “Please
produce an autobiographical statement of no fewer than 1,000 words.” I was
being ordered by strangers to divulge my thoughts on perhaps the only subject
on which I didn’t have any thoughts: the subject of me, whoever he was. I just
couldn’t do it. I was blocked. I didn’t turn anything in and received an
Incomplete.

My problem, like the prompt itself, was personal. I couldn’t “produce an
autobiographical statement” because my life at the time was too confusing.
This was because my family was falling apart. My parents were getting a
divorce. It all happened so fast. My father moved out and my mother put the
house in Crofton on the market, and then moved with my sister and me into an
apartment, and then into a condominium in a development in nearby Ellicott
City. I’ve had friends tell me that you aren’t really an adult until you bury
a parent or become one yourself. But what no one ever mentions is that for
kids of a certain age, divorce is like both of those happening simultaneously.
Suddenly, the invulnerable icons of your childhood are gone. In their stead,
if there’s anyone at all, is a person even more lost than you are, full of
tears and rage, who craves your reassurance that everything will turn out
okay. It won’t, though, at least not for a while.

As the custody and visitation rights were being sorted by the courts, my
sister threw herself into college applications, was accepted, and started
counting down the days until she’d leave for the University of North Carolina
at Wilmington. Losing her meant losing my closest tie to what our family had
been.

I reacted by turning inward. I buckled down and willed myself into becoming
another person, a shape-shifter putting on the mask of whoever the people I
cared about needed at the time. Among family, I was dependable and sincere.
Among friends, mirthful and unconcerned. But when I was alone, I was subdued,
even morose, and constantly worried about being a burden. I was haunted by all
the road trips to North Carolina I’d complained through, all the Christmases
I’d ruined by bringing home bad report cards, all the times I’d refused to get
off-line and do my chores. Every childhood fuss I’d ever made flickered in my
mind like crime-scene footage, evidence that I was responsible for what had
happened.

I tried to throw off the guilt by ignoring my emotions and feigning self-
sufficiency, until I projected a sort of premature adulthood. I stopped saying
that I was “playing” with the computer, and started saying that I was
“working” on it. Just changing those words, without remotely changing what I
was doing, made a difference in how I was perceived, by others and even by
myself.

I stopped calling myself “Eddie.” From now on, I was “Ed.” I got my first cell
phone, which I wore clipped to my belt like a grown-ass man.

The unexpected blessing of trauma—the opportunity for reinvention—taught me to
appreciate the world beyond the four walls of home. I was surprised to find
that as I put more and more distance between myself and the two adults who
loved me the most, I came closer to others, who treated me like a peer.
Mentors who taught me to sail, trained me to fight, coached me in public
speaking, and gave me the confidence to stand onstage—all of them helped to
raise me.

At the beginning of my sophomore year, though, I started getting tired a lot
and falling asleep more than usual—not just at school anymore, but now even at
the computer. I’d wake up in the middle of the night in a more or less upright
position, the screen in front of me full of gibberish because I’d passed out
atop the keys. Soon enough my joints were aching, my nodes were swollen, the
whites of my eyes turned yellow, and I was too exhausted to get out of bed,
even after sleeping for twelve hours or more at a stretch.

After having had more blood taken from me than I’d ever imagined was in my
body, I was eventually diagnosed with infectious mononucleosis. It was both a
seriously debilitating and seriously humiliating illness for me to have, not
least because it’s usually contracted through what my classmates called
“hooking up,” and at age fifteen the only “hooking up” I’d ever done involved
a modem. School was totally forgotten, my absences piled up, and not even that
made me happy. Not even an all-ice-cream diet made me happy. I barely had the
energy to do anything but play the games my parents gave me—each of them
trying to bring the cooler game, the newer game, as if they were in a
competition to perk me up or mitigate their guilt about the divorce. When I no
longer had it in me to even work a joystick, I wondered why I was alive.
Sometimes I’d wake up unable to recognize my surroundings. It would take me a
while to figure out whether the dimness meant that I was at my mother’s condo
or my father’s one-bedroom, and I’d have no recollection of having been driven
between them. Every day became the same.

It was a haze. I remember reading _The Conscience of a Hacker_ (aka _The
Hacker’s Manifesto_ ), Neal Stephenson’s _Snow Crash_ , and reams of J. R. R.
Tolkien, falling asleep midchapter and getting the characters and action
confused, until I was dreaming that Gollum was by my bedside and whining,
“Master, Master, information wants to be free.”

While I was resigned to all the fever dreams sleep brought me, the thought of
having to catch up on my schoolwork was the true nightmare. After I’d missed
approximately four months of class, I got a letter in the mail from Arundel
High informing me that I’d have to repeat my sophomore year. I’d say I was
shocked, but the moment I read the letter, I realized that I’d known this was
inevitable and had been dreading it for weeks. The prospect of returning to
school, let alone of repeating two semesters, was unimaginable to me, and I
was ready to do whatever it took to avoid it.

Just at the point when my glandular disease had developed into a full-on
depression, receiving the school news shook me out of my slump. Suddenly I was
upright and getting dressed in something other than pajamas. Suddenly I was
online and on the phone, searching for the system’s edges, searching for a
hack. After a bit of research, and a lot of form-filling, my solution landed
in the mailbox: I’d gotten myself accepted to college. Apparently, you don’t
need a high school diploma to apply.

Anne Arundel Community College was a local institution, certainly not as
venerable as my sister’s school, but it would do the trick. All that mattered
was that it was accredited. I took the offer of admission to my high school
administrators, who, with a curious and barely concealed mixture of
resignation and glee, agreed to let me enroll. I’d attend college classes two
days a week, which was just about the most that I could manage to stay upright
and functional. By taking classes above my grade level, I wouldn’t have to
suffer through the year I’d missed. I’d just skip it.

AACC was about twenty-five minutes away, and the first few times I drove
myself were perilous—I was a newly licensed driver who could barely stay awake
at the wheel. I’d go to class and then come directly home to sleep. I was the
youngest person in all my classes, and might even have been the youngest
person at the school, alternately a mascot-like object of novelty and a
discomfiting presence. This, along with the fact that I was still recovering,
meant that I didn’t hang out much. Also, because AACC was a commuter school,
it had no active campus life. The anonymity of the school suited me fine,
though, as did my classes, most of which were distinctly more interesting than
anything I’d napped through at Arundel High.

* * *

BEFORE I GO any further and leave high school forever, I should note that I
still owe that English class assignment, the one marked Incomplete. My
autobiographical statement. The older I get, the heavier it weighs on me, and
yet writing it hasn’t gotten any easier.

The fact is, no one with a biography like mine ever comes comfortably to
autobiography. It’s hard to have spent so much of my life trying to avoid
identification, only to turn around completely and share “personal
disclosures” in a book. The Intelligence Community tries to inculcate in its
workers a baseline anonymity, a sort of blank-page personality upon which to
inscribe secrecy and the art of imposture. You train yourself to be
inconspicuous, to look and sound like others. You live in the most ordinary
house, you drive the most ordinary car, you wear the same ordinary clothes as
everyone else. The difference is, you do it on purpose: normalcy, the
ordinary, is your cover. This is the perverse reward of a self-denying career
that brings no public glory: the private glory comes not during work, but
after, when you can go back out among other people again and successfully
convince them that you’re one of them.

Though there are a score of more popular and surely more accurate
psychological terms for this type of identity split, I tend to think of it as
human encryption. As in any process of encryption, the original material—your
core identity—still exists, but only in a locked and scrambled form. The
equation that enables this ciphering is a simple proportion: the more you know
about others, the less you know about yourself. After a time, you might forget
your likes and even your dislikes. You can lose your politics, along with any
and all respect for the political process that you might have had. Everything
gets subsumed by the job, which begins with a denial of character and ends
with a denial of conscience. “Mission First.”

Some version of the above served me for years as an explanation of my
dedication to privacy, and my inability or unwillingness to get personal. It’s
only now, when I’ve been out of the IC almost as long as I was in it, that I
realize: it isn’t nearly enough. After all, I was hardly a spy—I wasn’t even
shaving—when I failed to turn in my English class assignment. Instead, I was a
kid who’d been practicing spycraft for a while already—partly through my
online experiments with game-playing identities, but more than anything
through dealing with the silence and lies that followed my parents’ divorce.

With that rupture, we became a family of secret-keepers, experts at subterfuge
and hiding. My parents kept secrets from each other, and from me and my
sister. My sister and I would eventually keep our own secrets, too, when one
of us was staying with our father for the weekend and the other was staying
with our mother. One of the most difficult trials that a child of divorce has
to face is being interrogated by one parent about the new life of the other.

My mother would be gone for stretches, back on the dating scene. My father
tried his best to fill the void, but, at times, he would become enraged by the
protracted and expensive divorce process. Whenever that happened, it would
seem to me as if our roles had reversed. I had to be assertive and stand up to
him, to reason with him.

It’s painful to write this, though not so much because the events of this
period are painful to recall as because they’re in no way indicative of my
parents’ fundamental decency—or of how, out of love for their children, they
were eventually able to bury their differences, reconcile with respect, and
flourish separately in peace.

This kind of change is constant, common, and human. But an autobiographical
statement is static, the fixed document of a person in flux. This is why the
best account that someone can ever give of themselves is not a statement but a
pledge—a pledge to the principles they value, and to the vision of the person
they hope to become.

I’d enrolled in community college to save myself time after a setback, not
because I intended to continue with my higher education. But I made a pledge
to myself that I’d at least complete my high school degree. It was a weekend
when I finally kept that promise, driving out to a public school near
Baltimore to take the last test I’d ever take for the state of Maryland: the
exam for the General Education Development (GED) degree, which the US
government recognizes as the standard equivalent to a high school diploma.

I remember leaving the exam feeling lighter than ever, having satisfied the
two years of schooling that I still owed to the state just by taking a two-day
exam. It felt like a hack, but it was more than that. It was me staying true
to my word.

