# 9/11

From the age of sixteen, I was pretty much living on my own. With my mother
throwing herself into her work, I often had her condo to myself. I set my own
schedule, cooked my own meals, and did my own laundry. I was responsible for
everything but paying the bills.

I had a 1992 white Honda Civic and drove it all over the state, listening to
the indie alternative 99.1 WHFS—“Now Hear This” was one of its
catchphrases—because that’s what everybody else did. I wasn’t very good at
being normal, but I was trying.

My life became a circuit, tracing a route between my home, my college, and my
friends, particularly a new group that I met in Japanese class. I’m not quite
sure how long it took us to realize that we’d become a clique, but by the
second semester we attended class as much to see each other as to learn the
language. This, by the way, is the best way to “seem normal”: surround
yourself with people just as weird, if not weirder, than you are. Most of
these friends were aspiring artists and graphic designers obsessed with then
controversial anime, or Japanese animation. As our friendships deepened, so,
too, did my familiarity with anime genres, until I could rattle off relatively
informed opinions about a new library of shared experiences with titles like
_Grave of the Fireflies_ , _Revolutionary Girl Utena_ , _Neon Genesis
Evangelion_ , _Cowboy Bebop_ , _The Vision of Escaflowne_ , _Rurouni Kenshin_
, _Nausicaa of the Valley of the Wind_ , _Trigun, The Slayers_ , and my
personal favorite, _Ghost in the Shell_.

One of these new friends—I’ll call her Mae—was an older woman, much older, at
a comfortably adult twenty-five. She was something of an idol to the rest of
us, as a published artist and avid cosplayer. She was my Japanese conversation
partner and, I was impressed to find out, also ran a successful Web-design
business that I’ll call Squirrelling Industries, after the pet sugar gliders
she occasionally carried around in a purple felt Crown Royal bag.

That’s the story of how I became a freelancer: I started working as a Web
designer for the girl I met in class. She, or I guess her business, hired me
under the table at the then lavish rate of $30/hour in cash. The trick was how
many hours I’d actually get paid for.

Of course, Mae could’ve paid me in smiles—because I was smitten, just totally
in love with her. And though I didn’t do a particularly good job of concealing
that, I’m not sure that Mae minded, because I never missed a deadline or even
the slightest opportunity to do a favor for her. Also, I was a quick learner.
In a company of two, you’ve got to be able to do everything. Though I could,
and did, conduct my Squirrelling Industries business anywhere—that, after all,
is the point of working online—she preferred that I come into the office, by
which I mean her house, a two-story town house that she shared with her
husband, a neat and clever man whom I’ll call Norm.

Yes, Mae was married. What’s more, the town house that she and Norm lived in
was located on base at the southwestern edge of Fort Meade, where Norm worked
as an air force linguist assigned to the NSA. I can’t tell you if it’s legal
to run a business out of your home if your home is federal property on a
military installation, but as a teenager infatuated with a married woman who
was also my boss, I wasn’t exactly going to be a stickler for propriety.

It’s nearly inconceivable now, but at the time Fort Meade was almost entirely
accessible to anyone. It wasn’t all bollards and barricades and checkpoints
trapped in barbed wire. I could just drive onto the army base housing the
world’s most secretive intelligence agency in my ’92 Civic, windows down,
radio up, without having to stop at a gate and show ID. It seemed like every
other weekend or so a quarter of my Japanese class would congregate in Mae’s
little house behind NSA headquarters to watch anime and create comics. That’s
just the way it was, in those bygone days when “It’s a free country, isn’t
it?” was a phrase you heard in every schoolyard and sitcom.

On workdays I’d show up at Mae’s in the morning, pulling into her cul-de-sac
after Norm left for the NSA, and I’d stay through the day, until just before
he returned. On the occasions that Norm and I happened to overlap during the
two years or so I spent working for his wife, he was, all things considered,
kind and generous to me. At first, I assumed that he was oblivious to my
infatuation, or had such a low opinion of my chances as a seducer that he
didn’t mind leaving me alone with his wife. But one day, when we happened to
pass each other—him going, me coming—he politely mentioned that he kept a gun
on the nightstand.

Squirrelling Industries, which was really just Mae and me, was pretty typical
of basement start-ups circa the dot-com boom, small enterprises competing for
scraps before everything went bust. How it worked was that a large company—a
carmaker, for instance—would hire a major ad agency or PR firm to build their
website and just generally spiff up their Internet presence. The large company
would know nothing about building websites, and the ad agency or PR firm would
know only slightly more—just enough to post a job description seeking a Web
designer at one of the then proliferating freelance work portals.

Mom-and-pop operations—or, in this case, older-married-woman/young-single-man
operations—would then bid for the jobs, and the competition was so intense
that the quotes would be driven ridiculously low. Factor in the cut that the
winning contractor would have to pay to the work portal, and the money was
barely enough for an adult to survive on, let alone a family. On top of the
lack of financial reward, there was also a humiliating lack of credit: the
freelancers could rarely mention what projects they’d done, because the ad
agency or PR firm would claim to have developed it all in-house.

I got to know a lot about the world, particularly the business world, with Mae
as my boss. She was strikingly canny, working twice as hard as her peers to
make it in what was then a fairly macho industry, where every other client was
out to screw you for free labor. This culture of casual exploitation
incentivized freelancers to find ways to hack around the system, and Mae had a
talent for managing her relationships in such a way as to bypass the work
portals. She tried to cut out the middlemen and third parties and deal
directly with the largest clients possible. She was wonderful at this,
particularly after my help on the technical side allowed her to focus
exclusively on the business and art. She parlayed her illustration skills into
logo design and offered basic branding services. As for my work, the methods
and coding were simple enough for me to pick up on the fly, and although they
could be brutally repetitive, I wasn’t complaining. I took to even the most
menial Notepad++ job with pleasure. It’s amazing what you do for love,
especially when it’s unrequited.

I can’t help but wonder whether Mae was fully aware of my feelings for her all
along, and simply leveraged them to her best advantage. But if I was a victim,
I was a willing one, and my time under her left me better off.

Still, about a year into my tenure with Squirrelling Industries, I realized I
had to plan for my future. Professional industry certifications for the IT
sector were becoming hard to ignore. Most job listings and contracts for
advanced work were beginning to require that applicants be officially
accredited by major tech companies like IBM and Cisco in the use and service
of their products. At least, that was the gist of a radio commercial that I
kept hearing. One day, coming home from my commute after hearing the
commercial for what must have been the hundredth time, I found myself dialing
the 1-800 number and signing up for the Microsoft certification course that
was being offered by the Computer Career Institute at Johns Hopkins
University. The entire operation, from its embarrassingly high cost to its
location at a “satellite campus” instead of at the main university, had the
faint whiff of a scam, but I didn’t care. It was a nakedly transactional
affair—one that would allow Microsoft to impose a tax on the massively rising
demand for IT folks, HR managers to pretend that an expensive piece of paper
could distinguish bona fide pros from filthy charlatans, and nobodies like me
to put the magic words “Johns Hopkins” on their résumé and jump to the front
of the hiring line.

The certification credentials were being adopted as industry standard almost
as quickly as the industry could invent them. An “A+ Certification” meant that
you were able to service and repair computers. A “Net+ Certification” meant
that you were able to handle some basic networking. But these were just ways
to become the guy who worked the Help Desk. The best pieces of paper were
grouped under the rubric of the Microsoft Certified Professional series. There
was the entry-level MCP, the Microsoft Certified Professional; the more
accomplished MCSA, the Microsoft Certified Systems Administrator; and the top
piece of printed-out technical credibility, the MCSE, Microsoft Certified
Systems Engineer. This was the brass ring, the guaranteed meal ticket. At the
lowest of the low end, an MCSE’s starting salary was $40,000 per year, a sum
that—at the turn of the millennium and the age of seventeen—I found
astonishing. But why not? Microsoft was trading above $100 per share, and Bill
Gates had just been named the richest man in the world.

In terms of technical know-how, the MCSE wasn’t the easiest to get, but it
also didn’t require what most self-respecting hackers would consider unicorn
genius either. In terms of time and money, the commitment was considerable. I
had to take seven separate tests, which cost $150 each, and pay something like
$18,000 in tuition to Hopkins for the full battery of prep classes, which—true
to form—I didn’t finish, opting to go straight to the testing after I felt I’d
had enough. Unfortunately, Hopkins didn’t give refunds.

With payments looming on my tuition loan, I now had a more practical reason to
spend time with Mae: money. I asked her to give me more hours. She agreed, and
asked me to start coming in at 9:00 a.m. It was an egregiously early hour,
especially for a freelancer, which was why I was running late one Tuesday
morning.

I was speeding down Route 32 under a beautiful Microsoft-blue sky, trying not
to get caught by any speed traps. With a little luck, I’d roll into Mae’s
sometime before 9:30, and—with my window down and my hand riding the wind—it
felt like a lucky day. I had the talk radio cranked and was waiting for the
news to switch to the traffic.

Just as I was about to take the Canine Road shortcut into Fort Meade, an
update broke through about a plane crash in New York City.

Mae came to the door and I followed her up the stairs from the dim entryway to
the cramped office next to her bedroom. There wasn’t much to it: just our two
desks side by side, a drawing table for her art, and a cage for her squirrels.
Though I was slightly distracted by the news, we had work to do. I forced
myself to focus on the task at hand. I was just opening the project’s files in
a simple text editor—we wrote the code for websites by hand—when the phone
rang.

Mae picked up. “What? Really?”

Because we were sitting so close together, I could hear her husband’s voice.
And he was yelling.

Mae’s expression turned to alarm, and she loaded a news site on her computer.
The only TV was downstairs. I was reading the site’s report about a plane
hitting one of the Twin Towers of the World Trade Center, when Mae said,
“Okay. Wow. Okay,” and hung up.

She turned to me. “A second plane just hit the other tower.”

Until that moment, I’d thought it had been an accident.

Mae said, “Norm thinks they’re going to close the base.”

“Like, the gates?” I said. “Seriously?” The scale of what had happened had yet
to hit me. I was thinking about my commute.

“Norm said you should go home. He doesn’t want you to get stuck.”

I sighed, and saved the work I’d barely started. Just when I got up to leave,
the phone rang again, and this time the conversation was even shorter. Mae was
pale.

“You’re not going to believe this.”

Pandemonium, chaos: our most ancient forms of terror. They both refer to a
collapse of order and the panic that rushes in to fill the void. For as long
as I live, I’ll remember retracing my way up Canine Road—the road past the
NSA’s headquarters—after the Pentagon was attacked. Madness poured out of the
agency’s black glass towers, a tide of yelling, ringing cell phones, and cars
revving up in the parking lots and fighting their way onto the street. At the
moment of the worst terrorist attack in American history, the staff of the
NSA—the major signals intelligence agency of the American IC—was abandoning
its work by the thousands, and I was swept up in the flood.

NSA director Michael Hayden issued the order to evacuate before most of the
country even knew what had happened. Subsequently, the NSA and the CIA—which
also evacuated all but a skeleton crew from its own headquarters on 9/11—would
explain their behavior by citing a concern that one of the agencies might
potentially, possibly, perhaps be the target of the fourth and last hijacked
airplane, United Airlines Flight 93, rather than, say, the White House or
Capitol.

I sure as hell wasn’t thinking about the next likeliest targets as I crawled
through the gridlock, with everyone trying to get their cars out of the same
parking lot simultaneously. I wasn’t thinking about anything at all. What I
was doing was obediently following along, in what today I recall as one
totalizing moment—a clamor of horns (I don’t think I’d ever heard a car horn
at an American military installation before) and out-of-phase radios shrieking
the news of the South Tower’s collapse while the drivers steered with their
knees and feverishly pressed redial on their phones. I can still feel it—the
present-tense emptiness every time my call was dropped by an overloaded cell
network, and the gradual realization that, cut off from the world and stalled
bumper to bumper, even though I was in the driver’s seat, I was just a
passenger.

The stoplights on Canine Road gave way to humans, as the NSA’s special police
went to work directing traffic. In the ensuing hours, days, and weeks they’d
be joined by convoys of Humvees topped with machine guns, guarding new
roadblocks and checkpoints. Many of these new security measures became
permanent, supplemented by endless rolls of wire and massive installations of
surveillance cameras. With all this security, it became difficult for me to
get back on base and drive past the NSA—until the day I was employed there.

These trappings of what would be called the War on Terror weren’t the only
reason I gave up on Mae after 9/11, but they certainly played a part. The
events of that day had left her shaken. In time, we stopped working together
and grew distant. I’d chat her up occasionally, only to find that my feelings
had changed and I’d changed, too. By the time Mae left Norm and moved to
California, she felt like a stranger to me. She was too opposed to the war.

