# 9/12

Try to remember the biggest family event you’ve ever been to—maybe a family
reunion. How many people were there? Maybe 30, 50? Though all of them together
comprise your family, you might not really have gotten the chance to know each
and every individual member. Dunbar’s number, the famous estimate of how many
relationships you can meaningfully maintain in life, is just 150. Now think
back to school. How many people were in your class in grade school, and in
high school? How many of them were friends, and how many others did you just
know as acquaintances, and how many still others did you simply recognize? If
you went to school in the United States, let’s say it’s a thousand. It
certainly stretches the boundaries of what you could say are all “your
people,” but you may still have felt a bond with them.

Nearly three thousand people died on 9/11. Imagine everyone you love, everyone
you know, even everyone with a familiar name or just a familiar face—and
imagine they’re gone. Imagine the empty houses. Imagine the empty school, the
empty classrooms. All those people you lived among, and who together formed
the fabric of your days, just not there anymore. The events of 9/11 left
holes. Holes in families, holes in communities. Holes in the ground.

Now, consider this: over one million people have been killed in the course of
America’s response.

The two decades since 9/11 have been a litany of American destruction by way
of American self-destruction, with the promulgation of secret policies, secret
laws, secret courts, and secret wars, whose traumatizing impact—whose very
existence—the US government has repeatedly classified, denied, disclaimed, and
distorted. After having spent roughly half that period as an employee of the
American Intelligence Community and roughly the other half in exile, I know
better than most how often the agencies get things wrong. I know, too, how the
collection and analysis of intelligence can inform the production of
disinformation and propaganda, for use as frequently against America’s allies
as its enemies—and sometimes against its own citizens. Yet even given that
knowledge, I still struggle to accept the sheer magnitude and speed of the
change, from an America that sought to define itself by a calculated and
performative respect for dissent to a security state whose militarized police
demand obedience, drawing their guns and issuing the order for total
submission now heard in every city: “Stop resisting.”

This is why whenever I try to understand how the last two decades happened, I
return to that September—to that ground-zero day and its immediate aftermath.
To return to that fall means coming up against a truth darker than the lies
that tied the Taliban to al-Qaeda and conjured up Saddam Hussein’s illusory
stockpile of WMDs. It means, ultimately, confronting the fact that the carnage
and abuses that marked my young adulthood were born not only in the executive
branch and the intelligence agencies, but also in the hearts and minds of all
Americans, myself included.

I remember escaping the panicked crush of the spies fleeing Fort Meade just as
the North Tower came down. Once on the highway, I tried to steer with one hand
while pressing buttons with the other, calling family indiscriminately and
never getting through. Finally I managed to get in touch with my mother, who
at this point in her career had left the NSA and was working as a clerk for
the federal courts in Baltimore. They, at least, weren’t evacuating.

Her voice scared me, and suddenly the only thing in the world that mattered to
me was reassuring her.

“It’s okay. I’m headed off base,” I said. “Nobody’s in New York, right?”

“I don’t—I don’t know. I can’t get in touch with Gran.”

“Is Pop in Washington?”

“He could be in the Pentagon for all I know.”

The breath went out of me. By 2001, Pop had retired from the Coast Guard and
was now a senior official in the FBI, serving as one of the heads of its
aviation section. This meant that he spent plenty of time in plenty of federal
buildings throughout DC and its environs.

Before I could summon any words of comfort, my mother spoke again. “There’s
someone on the other line. It might be Gran. I’ve got to go.”

When she didn’t call me back, I tried her number endlessly but couldn’t get
through, so I went home to wait, sitting in front of the blaring TV while I
kept reloading news sites. The new cable modem we had was quickly proving more
resilient than all of the telecom satellites and cell towers, which were
failing across the country.

My mother’s drive back from Baltimore was a slog through crisis traffic. She
arrived in tears, but we were among the lucky ones. Pop was safe.

The next time we saw Gran and Pop, there was a lot of talk—about Christmas
plans, about New Year’s plans—but the Pentagon and the towers were never
mentioned.

My father, by contrast, vividly recounted his 9/11 to me. He was at Coast
Guard Headquarters when the towers were hit, and he and three of his fellow
officers left their offices in the Operations Directorate to find a conference
room with a screen so they could watch the news coverage. A young officer
rushed past them down the hall and said, “They just bombed the Pentagon.” Met
with expressions of disbelief, the young officer repeated, “I’m serious—they
just bombed the Pentagon.” My father hustled over to a wall-length window that
gave him a view across the Potomac of about two-fifths of the Pentagon and
swirling clouds of thick black smoke.

The more that my father related this memory, the more intrigued I became by
the line: “They just bombed the Pentagon.” Every time he said it, I recall
thinking, “They”? Who were “They”?

America immediately divided the world into “Us” and “Them,” and everyone was
either with “Us” or against “Us,” as President Bush so memorably remarked even
while the rubble was still smoldering. People in my neighborhood put up new
American flags, as if to show which side they’d chosen. People hoarded red,
white, and blue Dixie cups and stuffed them through every chain-link fence on
every overpass of every highway between my mother’s home and my father’s, to
spell out phrases like UNITED WE STAND and STAND TOGETHER NEVER FORGET.

I sometimes used to go to a shooting range and now alongside the old targets,
the bull’s-eyes and flat silhouettes, were effigies of men in Arab headdress.
Guns that had languished for years behind the dusty glass of the display cases
were now marked SOLD. Americans also lined up to buy cell phones, hoping for
advance warning of the next attack, or at least the ability to say good-bye
from a hijacked flight.

Nearly a hundred thousand spies returned to work at the agencies with the
knowledge that they’d failed at their primary job, which was protecting
America. Think of the guilt they were feeling. They had the same anger as
everybody else, but they also felt the guilt. An assessment of their mistakes
could wait. What mattered most at that moment was that they redeem themselves.
Meanwhile, their bosses got busy campaigning for extraordinary budgets and
extraordinary powers, leveraging the threat of terror to expand their
capabilities and mandates beyond the imagination not just of the public but
even of those who stamped the approvals.

September 12 was the first day of a new era, which America faced with a
unified resolve, strengthened by a revived sense of patriotism and the
goodwill and sympathy of the world. In retrospect, my country could have done
so much with this opportunity. It could have treated terror not as the
theological phenomenon it purported to be, but as the crime it was. It could
have used this rare moment of solidarity to reinforce democratic values and
cultivate resilience in the now-connected global public.

Instead, it went to war.

The greatest regret of my life is my reflexive, unquestioning support for that
decision. I was outraged, yes, but that was only the beginning of a process in
which my heart completely defeated my rational judgment. I accepted all the
claims retailed by the media as facts, and I repeated them as if I were being
paid for it. I wanted to be a liberator. I wanted to free the oppressed. I
embraced the truth constructed for the good of the state, which in my passion
I confused with the good of the country. It was as if whatever individual
politics I’d developed had crashed—the anti-institutional hacker ethos
instilled in me online, and the apolitical patriotism I’d inherited from my
parents, both wiped from my system—and I’d been rebooted as a willing vehicle
of vengeance. The sharpest part of the humiliation comes from acknowledging
how easy this transformation was, and how readily I welcomed it.

I wanted, I think, to be part of something. Prior to 9/11, I’d been ambivalent
about serving because it had seemed pointless, or just boring. Everyone I knew
who’d served had done so in the post–Cold War world order, between the fall of
the Berlin Wall and the attacks of 2001. In that span, which coincided with my
youth, America lacked for enemies. The country I grew up in was the sole
global superpower, and everything seemed—at least to me, or to people like
me—prosperous and settled. There were no new frontiers to conquer or great
civic problems to solve, except online. The attacks of 9/11 changed all that.
Now, finally, there was a fight.

My options dismayed me, however. I thought I could best serve my country
behind a terminal, but a normal IT job seemed too comfortable and safe for
this new world of asymmetrical conflict. I hoped I could do something like in
the movies or on TV—those hacker-versus-hacker scenes with walls of virus-
warning blinkenlights, tracking enemies and thwarting their schemes.
Unfortunately for me, the primary agencies that did that—the NSA, the CIA—had
their hiring requirements written a half century ago and often rigidly
required a traditional college degree, meaning that though the tech industry
considered my AACC credits and MCSE certification acceptable, the government
wouldn’t. The more I read around online, however, the more I realized that the
post-9/11 world was a world of exceptions. The agencies were growing so much
and so quickly, especially on the technical side, that they’d sometimes waive
the degree requirement for military veterans. It’s then that I decided to join
up.

You might be thinking that my decision made sense, or was inevitable, given my
family’s record of service. But it didn’t and it wasn’t. By enlisting, I was
as much rebelling against that well-established legacy as I was conforming to
it—because after talking to recruiters from every branch, I decided to join
the army, whose leadership some in my Coast Guard family had always considered
the crazy uncles of the US military.

When I told my mother, she cried for days. I knew better than to tell my
father, who’d already made it very clear during hypothetical discussions that
I’d be wasting my technical talents there. I was twenty years old; I knew what
I was doing.

The day I left, I wrote my father a letter—handwritten, not typed—that
explained my decision, and slipped it under the front door of his apartment.
It closed with a statement that still makes me wince. “I’m sorry, Dad,” I
wrote, “but this is vital for my personal growth.”

