# Moscow

For a coastal country at the northwestern edge of South America, half a globe
away from Hong Kong, Ecuador is in the middle of everything: not for nothing
does its name translate to “The Republic of the Equator.” Most of my fellow
North Americans would correctly say that it’s a small country, and some might
even know enough to call it historically oppressed. But they are ignorant if
they think it’s a backwater. When Rafael Correa became president in 2007, as
part of a tide of so-called democratic socialist leaders who swept elections
in the late 1990s and early 2000s in Bolivia, Argentina, Brazil, Paraguay, and
Venezuela, he initiated a spate of policies intended to oppose and reverse the
effects of US imperialism in the region. One of these measures, reflecting
President Correa’s previous career as an economist, was an announcement that
Ecuador would consider its national debt illegitimate—technically, it would be
classified as “odious debt,” which is national debt incurred by a despotic
regime or through despotic imperialist trade policies. Repayment of odious
debt is not enforceable. With this announcement, Correa freed his people from
decades of economic serfdom, though he made not a few enemies among the class
of financiers who direct much of US foreign policy.

Ecuador, at least in 2013, had a hard-earned belief in the institution of
political asylum. Most famously, the Ecuadorean embassy in London had become,
under Correa, the safe haven and redoubt of WikiLeaks’ Julian Assange. I had
no desire to live in an embassy, perhaps because I’d already worked in one.
Still, my Hong Kong lawyers agreed that, given the circumstances, Ecuador
seemed to be the most likely country to defend my right to political asylum
and the least likely to be cowed by the ire of the hegemon that ruled its
hemisphere. My growing but ad hoc team of lawyers, journalists, technologists,
and activists concurred. My hope was to make it to Ecuador proper.

With my government having decided to charge me under the Espionage Act, I
stood accused of a political crime, meaning a crime whose victim is the state
itself rather than a person. Under international humanitarian law, those
accused in this way are generally exempt from extradition, because the charge
of political criminality is more often than not an authoritarian attempt at
quashing legitimate dissent. In theory, this means that government
whistleblowers should be protected against extradition almost everywhere. In
practice, of course, this is rarely the case, especially when the government
that perceives itself wronged is America’s—which claims to foster democracy
abroad yet secretly maintains fleets of privately contracted aircraft
dedicated to that form of unlawful extradition known as rendition, or, as
everyone else calls it, kidnapping.

The team supporting me had reached out to officials everywhere from Iceland to
India, asking if they would respect the prohibition against extradition of
those accused of political crimes and commit to noninterference in my
potential travel. It soon became evident that even the most advanced
democracies were afraid of incurring the wrath of the US government. They were
happy to privately express their sympathies, but reluctant to offer even
unofficial guarantees. The common denominator of the advice that filtered back
to me was to land only in non-extradition countries, and avoid any route that
crossed the airspace of any countries with a record of cooperation with or
deference to the US military. One official, I think from France, suggested
that the odds of my successful transit might be significantly increased if I
were issued a _laissez-passer_ , a UN-recognized one-way travel document
typically issued to grant safe passage to refugees crossing borders—but
obtaining one of those was easier said than done.

Enter Sarah Harrison, a journalist and an editor for WikiLeaks. The moment the
news broke that an American had unmasked a global system of mass surveillance,
she had immediately flown to Hong Kong. Through her experience with the
website and particularly with the fate of Assange, she was poised to offer me
the world’s best asylum advice. It didn’t hurt that she also had family
connections with the legal community in Hong Kong.

People have long ascribed selfish motives to Assange’s desire to give me aid,
but I believe he was genuinely invested in one thing above all—helping me
evade capture. That doing so involved tweaking the US government was just a
bonus for him, an ancillary benefit, not the goal. It’s true that Assange can
be self-interested and vain, moody, and even bullying—after a sharp
disagreement just a month after our first, text-based conversation, I never
communicated with him again—but he also sincerely conceives of himself as a
fighter in a historic battle for the public’s right to know, a battle he will
do anything to win. It’s for this reason that I regard it as too reductive to
interpret his assistance as merely an instance of scheming or self-promotion.
More important to him, I believe, was the opportunity to establish a
counterexample to the case of the organization’s most famous source, US Army
Private Chelsea Manning, whose thirty-five-year prison sentence was
historically unprecedented and a monstrous deterrent to whistleblowers
everywhere. Though I never was, and never would be, a source for Assange, my
situation gave him a chance to right a wrong. There was nothing he could have
done to save Manning, but he seemed, through Sarah, determined to do
everything he could to save me.

That said, I was initially wary of Sarah’s involvement. But Laura told me that
she was serious, competent, and, most important, independent: one of the few
at WikiLeaks who dared to openly disagree with Assange. Despite my caution, I
was in a difficult position, and as Hemingway once wrote, the way to make
people trustworthy is to trust them.

Laura informed me of Sarah’s presence in Hong Kong only a day or so before she
communicated with me on an encrypted channel, which itself was only a day or
two before I actually met her in person—and if I’m somewhat loose on my dates
here, you’ll have to forgive me: one frenetic day bled into the next. Sarah
had been a whirlwind, apparently, since the moment of her landing in Hong
Kong. Though she wasn’t a lawyer, she had deep expertise when it came to what
I’ll call the interpersonal or subofficial nuances of avoiding extradition.
She met with local Hong Kong human rights attorneys to seek independent
opinions, and I was deeply impressed by both her pace and her circumspection.
Her connections through WikiLeaks and the extraordinary courage of the
Ecuadorean consul in London, Fidel Narváez, together produced a _laissez-
passer_ in my name. This _laissez-passer_ , which was meant to get me to
Ecuador, had been issued by the consul on an emergency basis, since we didn’t
have time for his home government to formally approve it. The moment it was in
hand, Sarah hired a van to take us to the airport.

That’s how I met her—in motion. I’d like to say that I started off our
acquaintance by offering my thanks, but instead the first thing I said was:
“When was the last time you slept?” Sarah looked just as ragged and disheveled
as I did. She stared out the window, as if trying to recall the answer, but
then just shook her head: “I don’t know.”

We were both developing colds and our careful conversation was punctuated by
sneezes and coughs. By her own account, she was motivated to support me out of
loyalty to her conscience more than to the ideological demands of her
employer. Certainly her politics seemed shaped less by Assange’s feral
opposition to central power than by her own conviction that too much of what
passed for contemporary journalism served government interests rather than
challenged them. As we hurtled to the airport, as we checked in, as we cleared
passport control for the first of what should have been three flights, I kept
waiting for her to ask me for something—anything, even just for me to make a
statement on Assange’s, or the organization’s, behalf. But she never did,
although she did cheerfully share her opinion that I was a fool for trusting
media conglomerates to fairly guard the gate between the public and the truth.
For that instance of straight talk, and for many others, I’ll always admire
Sarah’s honesty.

We were traveling to Quito, Ecuador, via Moscow via Havana via Caracas for a
simple reason: it was the only safe route available. There were no direct
flights to Quito from Hong Kong, and all of the other connecting flights
traveled through US airspace. While I was concerned about the massive layover
in Russia—we’d have almost twenty hours before the Havana flight departed—my
primary fear was actually the next leg of the journey, because traveling from
Russia to Cuba meant passing through NATO airspace. I didn’t particularly
relish flying over a country like Poland, which during my lifetime has done
everything to please the US government, including hosting CIA black sites
where my former IC colleagues subjected prisoners to “enhanced
interrogations,” another Bush-era euphemism for “torture.”

I wore my hat down over my eyes to avoid being recognized, and Sarah did the
seeing for me. She took my arm and led me to the gate, where we waited until
boarding. This was the last moment for her to back out, and I told her so.
“You don’t have to do this,” I said.

“Do what?”

“Protect me like this.”

Sarah stiffened. “Let’s get one thing clear,” she said as we boarded, “I’m not
protecting you. No one can protect you. What I’m here for is to make it harder
for anyone to interfere. To make sure everyone’s on their best behavior.”

“So you’re my witness,” I said.

She gave a slight wry smile. “Someone has to be the last person to ever see
you alive. It might as well be me.”

Though the three points where I’d thought we were most likely to get stopped
were now behind us (check-in, passport control, and the gate), I didn’t feel
safe on the plane. I didn’t want to get complacent. I took the window seat and
Sarah sat next to me, to screen me from the other passengers across the row.
After what felt like an eternity, the cabin doors were shut, the skybridge
pulled away, and finally, we were moving. But just before the plane rolled
from the tarmac onto the runway, it halted sharply. I was nervous. Pressing
the brim of my hat up against the glass, I strained to catch the sound of
sirens or the flashing of blue lights. It felt like I was playing the waiting
game all over again—it was a wait that wouldn’t end. Until, suddenly, the
plane rolled into motion again and took a turn, and I realized that we were
just far back in the line for takeoff.

My spirits rose with the wheels, but it was hard to believe I was out of the
fire. Once we were airborne, I loosened my grip from my thighs and felt an
urge to take my lucky Rubik’s Cube out of my bag. But I knew I couldn’t,
because nothing would make me more conspicuous. Instead, I sat back, pulled my
hat down again, and kept my half-open eyes on the map on the seatback screen
just in front of me, tracking the pixelated route across China, Mongolia, and
Russia—none of which would be especially amenable to doing any favors for the
US State Department. However, there was no predicting what the Russian
government would do once we landed, beyond hauling us into an inspection so
they could search through my blank laptops and empty bag. What I hoped might
spare us any more invasive treatment was that the world was watching and my
lawyers and WikiLeaks’ lawyers were aware of our itinerary.

It was only once we’d entered Chinese airspace that I realized I wouldn’t be
able to get any rest until I asked Sarah this question explicitly: “Why are
you helping me?”

She flattened out her voice, as if trying to tamp down her passions, and told
me that she wanted me to have a better outcome. She never said better than
what outcome or whose, and I could only take that answer as a sign of her
discretion and respect.

I was reassured, enough at least to finally get some sleep.

* * *

WE LANDED AT Sheremetyevo on June 23 for what we assumed would be a twenty-
hour layover. It has now dragged on for over six years. Exile is an endless
layover.

In the IC, and in the CIA in particular, you get a lot of training on how not
to get into trouble at customs. You have to think about how you dress, how you
act. You have to think about the things in your bag and the things in your
pockets and the tales they tell about you. Your goal is to be the most boring
person in line, with the most perfectly forgettable face. But none of that
really matters when the name on your passport is all over the news.

I handed my little blue book to the bearish guy in the passport control booth,
who scanned it and rifled through its pages. Sarah stood stalwart behind me.
I’d made sure to take note of the time it took for the people ahead of us in
line to clear the booth, and our turn was taking too long. Then the guy picked
up his phone, grumbled some words in Russian, and almost immediately—far too
quickly—two security officers in suits approached. They must have been
waiting. The officer in front took my little blue book from the guy in the
booth and leaned in close to me. “There is problem with passport,” he said.
“Please, come with.”

Sarah immediately stepped to my side and unleashed a fast flurry of English:
“I’m his legal adviser. Wherever he goes, I go. I’m coming with you. According
to the—”

But before she could cite the relevant UN covenants and Genevan codicils, the
officer held up his hand and glanced at the line. He said, “Okay, sure, okay.
You come.”

I don’t know whether the officer had even understood what she said. He just
clearly didn’t want to make a scene.

The two security officers marched us briskly toward what I assumed was going
to be a special room for secondary inspection, but instead turned out to be
one of Sheremetyevo’s plush business lounges—like a business-class or first-
class area, with just a few passengers basking obliviously in their luxury
seats. Sarah and I were directed past them and down a hall into a conference
room of sorts, filled with men in gray sitting around a table. There were a
half-dozen of them or so, with military haircuts. One guy sat separately,
holding a pen. He was a notetaker, a kind of secretary, I guessed. He had a
folder in front of him containing a pad of paper. On the cover of the folder
was a monocolor insignia that I didn’t need Russian in order to understand: it
was a sword and shield, the symbol of Russia’s foremost intelligence service,
the Federal Security Service (FSB). Like the FBI in the United States, the FSB
exists not only to spy and investigate but also to make arrests.

At the center of the table sat an older man in a finer suit than the others,
the white of his hair shining like a halo of authority. He gestured for Sarah
and me to sit opposite him, with an authoritative sweep of the hand and a
smile that marked him as a seasoned case officer, or whatever the term is for
a CO’s Russian equivalent. Intelligence services the world over are full of
such figures—dedicated actors who will try on different emotions until they
get the response they want.

He cleared his throat and gave me, in decent English, what the CIA calls a
cold pitch, which is basically an offer by a foreign intelligence service that
can be summarized as “come and work for us.” In return for cooperation, the
foreigners dangle favors, which can be anything from stacks of cash to a get-
out-of-jail-free card for pretty much anything from fraud to murder. The
catch, of course, is that the foreigners always expect something of equal or
better value in exchange. That clear and unambiguous transaction, however, is
never how it starts. Come to think of it, it’s funny that it’s called a cold
pitch, because the person making it always starts warm, with grins, levity,
and words of sympathy.

I knew I had to cut him off. If you don’t cut off a foreign intelligence
officer right away, it might not matter whether you ultimately reject their
offer, because they can destroy your reputation simply by leaking a recording
of you considering it. So as the man apologized for inconveniencing us, I
imagined the hidden devices recording us, and tried to choose my words
carefully.

“Listen, I understand who you are, and what this is,” I said. “Please let me
be clear that I have no intention to cooperate with you. I’m not going to
cooperate with any intelligence service. I mean no disrespect, but this isn’t
going to be that kind of meeting. If you want to search my bag, it’s right
here,” and I pointed to it under my chair. “But I promise you, there’s nothing
in it that can help you.”

As I was speaking, the man’s face changed. He started to act wounded. “No, we
would never do that,” he said. “Please believe me, we only want to help you.”

Sarah cleared her throat and jumped in. “That’s quite kind of you, but I hope
you can understand that all we’d like is to make our connecting flight.”

For the briefest instant, the man’s feigned sorrow became irritation. “You are
his lawyer?”

“I’m his legal adviser,” Sarah answered.

The man asked me, “So you are not coming to Russia to be in Russia?”

“No.”

“And so may I ask where you are trying to go? What is your final destination?”

I said, “Quito, Ecuador, via Caracas, via Havana,” even though I knew that he
already knew the answer. He certainly had a copy of our itinerary, since Sarah
and I had traveled from Hong Kong on Aeroflot, the Russian flagship airline.

Up until this point, he and I had been reading from the same intelligence
script, but now the conversation swerved. “You haven’t heard?” he said. He
stood and looked at me like he was delivering the news of a death in the
family. “I am afraid to inform you that your passport is invalid.”

I was so surprised, I just stuttered. “I’m sorry, but I—I don’t believe that.”

The man leaned over the table and said, “No, it is true. Believe me. It is the
decision of your minister, John Kerry. Your passport has been canceled by your
government, and the air services have been instructed not to allow you to
travel.”

I was sure it was a trick, but I wasn’t quite sure to what purpose. “Give us a
minute,” I said, but even before I could ask, Sarah had snatched her laptop
out of her bag and was getting onto the airport Wi-Fi.

“Of course, you will check,” the man said, and he turned to his colleagues and
chatted amiably to them in Russian, as if he had all the time in the world.

It was reported on every site Sarah looked at. After the news had broken that
I’d left Hong Kong, the US State Department announced that it had canceled my
passport. It had revoked my travel document while I was still in midair.

I was incredulous: my own government had trapped me in Russia. The State
Department’s move might merely have been the result of bureaucratic
proceduralism—when you’re trying to catch a fugitive, putting out an Interpol
alert and canceling their passport is just standard operating procedure. But
in the final accounting it was self-defeating, as it handed Russia a massive
propaganda victory.

“It’s true,” said Sarah, with a shake of her head.

“So what will you do?” the man asked, and he walked around to our side of the
table.

Before I could take the Ecuadorean safe conduct pass out of my pocket, Sarah
said, “I’m so sorry, but I’m going to have to advise Mr. Snowden not to answer
any more questions.”

The man pointed at me, and said, “You will come.”

He gestured me to follow him to the far end of the conference room, where
there was a window. I went and stood next to him and looked. About three or
four floors below was street level and the largest media scrum I’ve ever seen,
scads of reporters wielding cameras and mics.

It was an impressive show, perhaps choreographed by the FSB, perhaps not, most
likely half and half. Almost everything in Russia is half and half. But at
least now I knew why Sarah and I had been brought to this conference room in
this lounge.

I went back to my chair but didn’t sit down again.

The man turned from the window to face me and said, “Life for a person in your
situation can be very difficult without friends who can help.” He let the
words linger.

Here it comes, I thought—the direct solicitation.

He said, “If there is some information, perhaps, some small thing you could
share with us?”

“We’ll be okay on our own,” I said. Sarah stood up next to me.

The man sighed. He turned to mumble in Russian, and his comrades rose and
filed out. “I hope you will not regret your decision,” he said to me. Then he
gave a slight bow and made his own exit, just as a pair of officials from the
airport administration entered.

I demanded to be allowed to go to the gate for the flight to Havana, but they
ignored me. I finally reached into my pocket and brandished the Ecuadorean
safe conduct pass, but they ignored that, too.

All told, we were trapped in the airport for a biblical forty days and forty
nights. Over the course of those days, I applied to a total of twenty-seven
countries for political asylum. Not a single one of them was willing to stand
up to American pressure, with some countries refusing outright, and others
declaring that they were unable to even consider my request until I arrived in
their territory—a feat that was impossible. Ultimately, the only head of state
that proved sympathetic to my cause was Burger King, who never denied me a
Whopper (hold the tomato and onion).

Soon, my presence in the airport became a global spectacle. Eventually the
Russians found it a nuisance. On July 1, the president of Bolivia, Evo
Morales, left another airport in Moscow, Vnukovo, in his Bolivian state plane
after attending the annual GECF, or Gas Exporting Countries Forum. The US
government, suspecting that I was onboard due to President Morales’s
expressions of solidarity, pressured the governments of Italy, France, Spain,
and Portugal to deny the plane access to their airspace, and succeeded in
diverting it to Vienna, Austria. There it was grounded, searched, and only
allowed to continue on its journey once no traces of me were found. This was a
startling violation of sovereignty, which occasioned UN censure. The incident
was an affront to Russia, which couldn’t guarantee a visiting head of state
safe passage home. And it confirmed to Russia and to me that any flight that
America suspected me of stowing away on ran the same risk of being diverted
and grounded.

The Russian government must have decided that it would be better off without
me and the media swarm clogging up the country’s major airport. On August 1 it
granted me temporary asylum. Sarah and I were allowed to leave Sheremetyevo,
but eventually only one of us would be heading home. Our time together served
to bind us as friends for life. I will always be grateful for the weeks she
spent by my side, for her integrity and her fortitude.

