# Read, Write, Execute

Read, Write, Execute: in computing, these are called permissions. Functionally
speaking, they determine the extent of your authority within a computer or
computer network, defining what exactly you can and cannot do. The right to
_read_ a file allows you to access its contents, while the right to _write_ a
file allows you to modify it. _Execution_ , meanwhile, means that you have the
ability to run a file or program, to carry out the actions it was designed to
do.

Read, Write, Execute: this was my simple three-step plan. I wanted to burrow
into the heart of the world’s most secure network to find the truth, make a
copy of it, and get it out into the world. And I had to do all this without
getting caught—without being read, written, and executed myself.

Almost everything you do on a computer, on any device, leaves a record.
Nowhere is this more true than at the NSA. Each log-in and log-out creates a
log entry. Each permission I used left its own forensic trace. Every time I
opened a file, every time I copied a file, that action was recorded. Every
time I downloaded, moved, or deleted a file, that was recorded, too, and
security logs were updated to reflect the event. There were network flow
records, public key infrastructure records—people even joked about cameras
hidden in the bathrooms, in the bathroom stalls. The agency had a not
inconsiderable number of counterintelligence programs spying on the people who
were spying on people, and if even one caught me doing something I wasn’t
supposed to be doing, it wouldn’t be a file that was getting deleted.

Luckily, the strength of these systems was also their weakness: their
complexity meant that not even the people running them necessarily knew how
they worked. Nobody actually understood where they overlapped and where their
gaps were. Nobody, that is, except the systems administrators. After all,
those sophisticated monitoring systems you’re imagining, the ones with scary
names like MIDNIGHTRIDER—somebody’s got to install them in the first place.
The NSA may have paid for the network, but sysadmins like myself were the ones
who really owned it.

The Read phase would involve dancing through the digital grid of tripwires
laid across the routes connecting the NSA to every other intelligence agency,
domestic and foreign. (Among these was the NSA’s UK partner, the Government
Communications Headquarters, or GCHQ, which was setting up dragnets like
OPTICNERVE, a program that saved a snapshot every five minutes from the
cameras of people video-chatting on platforms like Yahoo Messenger, and
PHOTONTORPEDO, which grabbed the IP addresses of MSN Messenger users.) By
using Heartbeat to bring in the documents I wanted, I could turn “bulk
collection” against those who’d turned it against the public, effectively
Frankensteining the IC. The agency’s security tools kept track of who read
what, but it didn’t matter: anyone who bothered to check their logs was used
to seeing Heartbeat by now. It would sound no alarms. It was the perfect
cover.

But while Heartbeat would work as a way of collecting the files—far too many
files—it only brought them to the server in Hawaii, a server that kept logs
even I couldn’t get around. I needed a way to work with the files, search
them, and discard the irrelevant and uninteresting, along with those
containing legitimate secrets that I wouldn’t be giving to journalists. At
this point, still in my Read phase, the hazards were manifold, due mainly to
the fact that the protocols I was up against were no longer geared to
monitoring but to prevention. If I ran my searches on the Heartbeat server, it
would light a massive electronic sign blinking ARREST ME.

I thought about this for a while. I couldn’t just copy the files directly from
the Heartbeat server onto a personal storage device and waltz out of the
Tunnel without being caught. What I could do, though, was bring the files
closer, directing them to an intermediate way station.

I couldn’t send them to one of our regular computers, because by 2012 all of
the Tunnel had been upgraded to new “thin client” machines: small helpless
computers with crippled drives and CPUs that couldn’t store or process data on
their own, but did all of their storage and processing on the cloud. In a
forgotten corner of the office, however, there was a pyramid of disused
desktop computers—old, moldering legacy machines the agency had wiped clean
and discarded. When I say old here, I mean young by the standards of anyone
who doesn’t live on a budget the size of the NSA’s. They were Dell PCs from as
recently as 2009 or 2010, large gray rectangles of comforting weight, which
could store and process data on their own without being connected to the
cloud. What I liked about them was that though they were still in the NSA
system, they couldn’t really be closely tracked as long as I kept them off the
central networks.

I could easily justify needing to use these stolid, reliable boxes by claiming
that I was trying to make sure Heartbeat worked with older operating systems.
After all, not everybody at every NSA site had one of the new “thin clients”
just yet. And what if Dell wanted to implement a civilian version of
Heartbeat? Or what if the CIA, or FBI, or some similarly backward organization
wanted to use it? Under the guise of compatibility testing, I could transfer
the files to these old computers, where I could search, filter, and organize
them as much as I wanted, as long as I was careful. I was carrying one of the
big old hulks back to my desk when I passed one of the IT directors, who
stopped me and asked me what I needed it for—he’d been a major proponent of
getting rid of them. “Stealing secrets,” I answered, and we laughed.

The Read phase ended with the files I wanted all neatly organized into
folders. But they were still on a computer that wasn’t mine, which was still
in the Tunnel underground. Enter, then, the Write phase, which for my purposes
meant the agonizingly slow, boring-but-also-cripplingly-scary process of
copying the files from the legacy Dells something that I could spirit out of
the building.

The easiest and safest way to copy a file off any IC workstation is also the
oldest: a camera. Smartphones, of course, are banned in NSA buildings, but
workers accidentally bring them in all the time without anyone noticing. They
leave them in their gym bags or in the pockets of their windbreakers. If
they’re caught with one in a random search and they act goofily abashed
instead of screaming panicked Mandarin into their wristwatch, they’re often
merely warned, especially if it’s their first offense. But getting a
smartphone loaded with NSA secrets out of the Tunnel is a riskier gambit. Odds
are that nobody would’ve noticed—or cared—if I walked out with a smartphone,
and it might have been an adequate tool for a staffer trying to copy a single
torture report, but I wasn’t wild about the idea of taking thousands of
pictures of my computer screen in the middle of a top secret facility. Also,
the phone would have had to be configured in such a way that even the world’s
foremost forensic experts could seize and search it without finding anything
on it that they shouldn’t.

I’m going to refrain from publishing how exactly I went about my own
writing—my own copying and encryption—so that the NSA will still be standing
tomorrow. I will mention, however, what storage technology I used for the
copied files. Forget thumbdrives; they’re too bulky for the relatively small
amount they store. I went, instead, for SD cards—the acronym stands for Secure
Digital. Actually, I went for the mini- and micro-SD cards.

You’ll recognize SD cards if you’ve ever used a digital camera or video
camera, or needed more storage on a tablet. They’re tiny little buggers,
miracles of nonvolatile flash storage, and—at 20 x 21.5 mm for the mini, 15 x
11 mm for the micro, basically the size of your pinkie fingernail—eminently
concealable. You can fit one inside the pried-off square of a Rubik’s Cube,
then stick the square back on, and nobody will notice. In other attempts I
carried a card in my sock, or, at my most paranoid, in my cheek, so I could
swallow it if I had to. Eventually, as I gained confidence, and certainty in
my methods of encryption, I’d just keep a card at the bottom of my pocket.
They hardly ever triggered metal detectors, and who wouldn’t believe I’d
simply forgotten something so small?

The size of SD cards, however, has one downside: they’re extremely slow to
write. Copying times for massive volumes of data are always long—at least
always longer than you want—but the duration tends to stretch even more when
you’re copying not to a speedy hard drive but to a minuscule silicon wafer
embedded in plastic. Also, I wasn’t just copying. I was deduplicating,
compressing, encrypting, none of which processes could be accomplished
simultaneously with any other. I was using all the skills I’d ever acquired in
my storage work, because that’s what I was doing, essentially. I was storing
the NSA’s storage, making an off-site backup of evidence of the IC’s abuses.

It could take eight hours or more—entire shifts—to fill a card. And though I
switched to working nights again, those hours were terrifying. There was the
old computer chugging, monitor off, with all but one fluorescent ceiling panel
dimmed to save energy in the after-hours. And there I was, turning the monitor
back on every once in a while to check the rate of progress and cringing. You
know the feeling—the sheer hell of following the completion bar as it
indicates 84 percent completed, 85 percent completed … 1:58:53 left … As it
filled toward the sweet relief of 100 percent, all files copied, I’d be
sweating, seeing shadows and hearing footsteps around every corner.

* * *

EXECUTE: THAT WAS the final step. As each card filled, I had to run my getaway
routine. I had to get that vital archive out of the building, past the bosses
and military uniforms, down the stairs and out the empty hall, past the badge
scans and armed guards and mantraps—those two-doored security zones in which
the next door doesn’t open until the previous door shuts and your badge scan
is approved, and if it isn’t, or if anything else goes awry, the guards draw
their weapons and the doors lock you in and you say, “Well, isn’t this
embarrassing?” This—per all the reports I’d been studying, and all the
nightmares I’d been having—was where they’d catch me, I was sure of it. Each
time I left, I was petrified. I’d have to force myself not to think about the
SD card. When you think about it, you act differently, suspiciously.

One unexpected upshot of gaining a better understanding of NSA surveillance
was that I’d also gained a better understanding of the dangers I faced. In
other words, learning about the agency’s systems had taught me how not to get
caught by them. My guides in this regard were the indictments that the
government had brought against former agents—mostly real bastards who, in IC
jargon, had “exfiltrated” classified information for profit. I compiled, and
studied, as many of these indictments as I could. The FBI—the agency that
investigates all crime within the IC—took great pride in explaining exactly
how they caught their suspects, and believe me, I didn’t mind benefiting from
their experience. It seemed that in almost every case, the FBI would wait to
make its arrest until the suspect had finished their work and was about to go
home. Sometimes they would let the suspect take the material out of a SCIF—a
Sensitive Compartmented Information Facility, which is a type of building or
room shielded against surveillance—and out into the public, where its very
presence was a federal crime. I kept imagining a team of FBI agents lying in
wait for me—there, out in the public light, just at the far end of the Tunnel.

I’d usually try to banter with the guards, and this was where my Rubik’s Cube
came in most handy. I was known to the guards and to everybody else at the
Tunnel as the Rubik’s Cube guy, because I was always working the cube as I
walked down the halls. I got so adept I could even solve it one-handed. It
became my totem, my spirit toy, and a distraction device as much for myself as
for my coworkers. Most of them thought it was an affectation, or a nerdy
conversation starter. And it was, but primarily it relieved my anxiety. It
calmed me.

I bought a few cubes and handed them out. Anyone who took to it, I’d give them
pointers. The more that people got used to them, the less they’d ever want a
closer look at mine.

I got along with the guards, or I told myself I did, mostly because I knew
where their minds were: elsewhere. I’d done something like their job before,
back at CASL. I knew how mind-numbing it was to spend all night standing,
feigning vigilance. Your feet hurt. After a while, all the rest of you hurts.
And you can get so lonely that you’ll talk to a wall.

I aimed to be more entertaining than the wall, developing my own patter for
each human obstacle. There was the one guard I talked to about insomnia and
the difficulties of day-sleeping (remember, I was on nights, so this would’ve
been around two in the morning). Another guy, we discussed politics. He called
Democrats “Demon Rats,” so I’d read Breitbart News in preparation for the
conversation. What they all had in common was a reaction to my cube: it made
them smile. Over the course of my employment at the Tunnel, pretty much all
the guards said some variation of, “Oh man, I used to play with that when I
was a kid,” and then, invariably, “I tried to take the stickers off to solve
it.” Me too, buddy. Me too.

It was only once I got home that I was able to relax, even just slightly. I
was still worried about the house being wired—that was another one of those
charming methods the FBI used against those it suspected of inadequate
loyalty. I’d rebuff Lindsay’s concerns about my insomniac ways until she hated
me and I hated myself. She’d go to bed and I’d go to the couch, hiding with my
laptop under a blanket like a child because cotton beats cameras. With the
threat of immediate arrest out of the way, I could focus on transferring the
files to a larger external storage device via my laptop—only somebody who
didn’t understand technology very well would think I’d keep them on the laptop
forever—and locking them down under multiple layers of encryption algorithms
using differing implementations, so that even if one failed the others would
keep them safe.

I’d been careful not to leave any traces at my work, and I took care that my
encryption left no traces of the documents at home. Still, I knew the
documents could lead back to me once I’d sent them to the journalists and
they’d been decrypted. Any investigator looking at which agency employees had
accessed, or could access, all these materials would come up with a list with
probably only a single name on it: mine. I could provide the journalists with
fewer materials, of course, but then they wouldn’t be able to most effectively
do their work. Ultimately, I had to contend with the fact that even one
briefing slide or PDF left me vulnerable, because all digital files contain
metadata, invisible tags that can be used to identify their origins.

I struggled with how to handle this metadata situation. I worried that if I
didn’t strip the identifying information from the documents, they might
incriminate me the moment the journalists decrypted and opened them. But I
also worried that by thoroughly stripping the metadata, I risked altering the
files—if they were changed in any way, that could cast doubt on their
authenticity. Which was more important: personal safety, or the public good?
It might sound like an easy choice, but it took me quite a while to bite the
bullet. I owned the risk, and left the metadata intact.

Part of what convinced me was my fear that even if I had stripped away the
metadata I knew about, there could be other digital watermarks I wasn’t aware
of and couldn’t scan for. Another part had to do with the difficulty of
scrubbing single-user documents. A single-user document is a document marked
with a user-specific code, so that if any publication’s editorial staff
decided to run it by the government, the government would know its source.
Sometimes the unique identifier was hidden in the date and time-stamp coding,
sometimes it involved the pattern of microdots in a graphic or logo. But it
might also be embedded in something, in some way, I hadn’t even thought of.
This phenomenon should have discouraged me, but instead it emboldened me. The
technological difficulty forced me, for the first time, to confront the
prospect of discarding my lifetime practice of anonymity and coming forward to
identify myself as the source. I would embrace my principles by signing my
name to them and let myself be condemned.

Altogether, the documents I selected fit on a single drive, which I left out
in the open on my desk at home. I knew that the materials were just as secure
now as they had ever been at the office. Actually, they were more secure,
thanks to multiple levels and methods of encryption. That’s the incomparable
beauty of the cryptological art. A little bit of math can accomplish what all
the guns and barbed wire can’t: a little bit of math can keep a secret.

