# Home on the Cloud

In 2011, I was back in the States, working for the same nominal employer,
Dell, but now attached to my old agency, the CIA. One mild spring day, I came
home from my first day at the new job and was amused to notice: the house I’d
moved into had a mailbox. It was nothing fancy, just one of those subdivided
rectangles common to town house communities, but still, it made me smile. I
hadn’t had a mailbox in years, and hadn’t ever checked this one. I might not
even have registered its existence had it not been overflowing—stuffed to
bursting with heaps of junk mail addressed to “Mr. Edward J. Snowden or
Current Resident.” The envelopes contained coupons and ad circulars for
household products. Someone knew that I’d just moved in.

A memory surfaced from my childhood, a memory of checking the mail and finding
a letter to my sister. Although I wanted to open it, my mother wouldn’t let
me.

I remember asking why. “Because,” she said, “it’s not addressed to you.” She
explained that opening mail intended for someone else, even if it was just a
birthday card or a chain letter, wasn’t a very nice thing to do. In fact, it
was a crime.

I wanted to know what kind of crime. “A big one, buddy,” my mother said. “A
federal crime.”

I stood in the parking lot, tore the envelopes in half, and carried them to
the trash.

I had a new iPhone in the pocket of my new Ralph Lauren suit. I had new
Burberry glasses. A new haircut. Keys to this new town house in Columbia,
Maryland, the largest place I’d ever lived in, and the first place that really
felt like mine. I was rich, or at least my friends thought so. I barely
recognized myself.

I’d decided it was best to live in denial and just make some money, make life
better for the people I loved—after all, wasn’t that what everybody else did?
But it was easier said than done. The denial, I mean. The money—that came
easy. So easy that I felt guilty.

Counting Geneva, and not counting periodic trips home, I’d been away for
nearly four years. The America I returned to felt like a changed country. I
won’t go as far as to say that I felt like a foreigner, but I did find myself
mired in way too many conversations I didn’t understand. Every other word was
the name of some TV show or movie I didn’t know, or a celebrity scandal I
didn’t care about, and I couldn’t respond—I had nothing to respond with.

Contradictory thoughts rained down like _Tetris_ blocks, and I struggled to
sort them out—to make them disappear. I thought, pity these poor, sweet,
innocent people—they’re victims, watched by the government, watched by the
very screens they worship. Then I thought: Shut up, stop being so
dramatic—they’re happy, they don’t care, and you don’t have to, either. Grow
up, do your work, pay your bills. That’s life.

A normal life was what Lindsay and I were hoping for. We were ready for the
next stage and had decided to settle down. We had a nice backyard with a
cherry tree that reminded me of a sweeter Japan, a spot on the Tama River
where Lindsay and I had laughed and rolled around atop the fragrant carpet of
Tokyo blossoms as we watched the _sakura_ fall.

Lindsay was getting certified as a yoga instructor. I, meanwhile, was getting
used to my new position—in sales.

One of the external vendors I’d worked with on EPICSHELTER ended up working
for Dell, and convinced me that I was wasting my time with getting paid by the
hour. I should get into the sales side of Dell’s business, he said, where I
could earn a fortune—for more ideas like EPICSHELTER. I’d be making an
astronomical leap up the corporate ladder, and he’d be getting a substantial
referral bonus. I was ready to be convinced, especially since it meant
distracting myself from my growing sense of unease, which could only get me
into trouble. The official job title was solutions consultant. It meant, in
essence, that I had to solve the problems created by my new partner, whom I’m
going to call Cliff, the account manager.

Cliff was supposed to be the face, and I was to be the brain. When we sat down
with the CIA’s technical royalty and purchasing agents, his job was to sell
Dell’s equipment and expertise by any means necessary. This meant reaching
deep into the seat of his pants for unlimited slick promises as to how we’d do
things for the agency, things that were definitely, definitely not possible
for our competitors (and, in reality, not possible for us, either). My job was
to lead a team of experts in building something that reduced the degree to
which Cliff had lied by just enough that, when the person who signed the check
pressed the Power button, we wouldn’t all be sent to jail.

No pressure.

Our main project was to help the CIA catch up with the bleeding edge—or just
with the technical standards of the NSA—by building it the buzziest of new
technologies, a “private cloud.” The aim was to unite the agency’s processing
and storage while distributing the ways by which data could be accessed. In
plain American, we wanted to make it so that someone in a tent in Afghanistan
could do exactly the same work in exactly the same way as someone at CIA
headquarters. The agency—and indeed the whole IC’s technical leadership—was
constantly complaining about “silos”: the problem of having a billion buckets
of data spread all over the world that they couldn’t keep track of or access.
So I was leading a team of some of the smartest people at Dell to come up with
a way that anyone, anywhere, could reach anything.

During the proof of concept stage, the working name of our cloud became
“Frankie.” Don’t blame me: on the tech side, we just called it “The Private
Cloud.” It was Cliff who named it, in the middle of a demo with the CIA,
saying they were going to love our little Frankenstein “because it’s a real
monster.”

The more promises Cliff made, the busier I became, leaving Lindsay and me only
the weekends to catch up with our parents and old friends. We tried to furnish
and equip our new home. The three-story place had come empty, so we had to get
everything, or everything that our parents hadn’t generously handed down to
us. This felt very mature, but was at the same time very telling about our
priorities: we bought dishes, cutlery, a desk, and a chair, but we still slept
on a mattress on the floor. I’d become allergic to credit cards, with all
their tracking, so we bought everything outright, with hard currency. When we
needed a car, I bought a ’98 Acura Integra from a classified ad for $3,000
cash. Earning money was one thing, but neither Lindsay nor I liked to spend
it, unless it was for computer equipment—or a special occasion. For
Valentine’s Day, I bought Lindsay the revolver she always wanted.

Our new condo was a twenty-minute drive from nearly a dozen malls, including
the Columbia Mall, which has nearly 1.5 million square feet of shopping,
occupied by some two hundred stores, a fourteen-screen AMC multiplex, a P.F.
Chang’s, and a Cheesecake Factory. As we drove the familiar roads in the beat-
up Integra, I was impressed, but also slightly taken aback, by all the
development that had occurred in my absence. The post-9/11 government spending
spree had certainly put a lot of money into a lot of local pockets. It was an
unsettling and even overwhelming experience to come back to America after
having been away for a while and to realize anew just how wealthy this part of
the country was, and how many consumer options it offered—how many big-box
retailers and high-end interior design showrooms. And all of them had sales.
For Presidents’ Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day, Labor Day, Columbus Day,
Veterans’ Day. Festive banners announced the latest discounts, just below all
the flags.

Our mission was pretty much appliance-based on this one afternoon I’m
recalling—we were at Best Buy. Having settled on a new microwave, we were
checking out, on Lindsay’s healthful insistence, a display of blenders. She
had her phone out and was in the midst of researching which of the ten or so
devices had the best reviews, when I found myself wandering over to the
computer department at the far end of the store.

But along the way, I stopped. There, at the edge of the kitchenware section,
ensconced atop a brightly decorated and lit elevated platform, was a shiny new
refrigerator. Rather, it was a “Smartfridge,” which was being advertised as
“Internet-equipped.”

This, plain and simple, blew my mind.

A salesperson approached, interpreting my stupefaction as interest—“It’s
amazing, isn’t it?”—and proceeded to demonstrate a few of the features. A
screen was embedded in the door of the fridge, and next to the screen was a
holder for a tiny stylus, which allowed you to scribble messages. If you
didn’t want to scribble, you could record audio and video memos. You could
also use the screen as you would your regular computer, because the
refrigerator had Wi-Fi. You could check your email, or check your calendar.
You could watch YouTube clips, or listen to MP3s. You could even make phone
calls. I had to restrain myself from keying in Lindsay’s number and saying,
from across the floor, “I’m calling from a fridge.”

Beyond that, the salesperson continued, the fridge’s computer kept track of
internal temperature, and, through scanning barcodes, the freshness of your
food. It also provided nutritional information and suggested recipes. I think
the price was over $9,000. “Delivery included,” the salesperson said.

I remember driving home in a confused silence. This wasn’t quite the stunning
moonshot tech-future we’d been promised. I was convinced the only reason that
thing was Internet-equipped was so that it could report back to its
manufacturer about its owner’s usage and about any other household data that
was obtainable. The manufacturer, in turn, would monetize that data by selling
it. And we were supposed to pay for the privilege.

I wondered what the point was of my getting so worked up over government
surveillance if my friends, neighbors, and fellow citizens were more than
happy to invite corporate surveillance into their homes, allowing themselves
to be tracked while browsing in their pantries as efficiently as if they were
browsing the Web. It would still be another half decade before the domotics
revolution, before “virtual assistants” like Amazon Echo and Google Home were
welcomed into the bedroom and placed proudly on nightstands to record and
transmit all activity within range, to log all habits and preferences (not to
mention fetishes and kinks), which would then be developed into advertising
algorithms and converted into cash. The data we generate just by living—or
just by letting ourselves be surveilled while living—would enrich private
enterprise and impoverish our private existence in equal measure. If
government surveillance was having the effect of turning the citizen into a
subject, at the mercy of state power, then corporate surveillance was turning
the consumer into a product, which corporations sold to other corporations,
data brokers, and advertisers.

Meanwhile, it felt as if every major tech company, including Dell, was rolling
out new civilian versions of what I was working on for the CIA: a cloud. (In
fact, Dell had even tried four years previously to trademark the term “cloud
computing” but was denied.) I was amazed at how willingly people were signing
up, so excited at the prospect of their photos and videos and music and
e-books being universally backed up and available that they never gave much
thought as to why such an uber-sophisticated and convenient storage solution
was being offered to them for “free” or for “cheap” in the first place.

I don’t think I’d ever seen such a concept be so uniformly bought into, on
every side. “The cloud” was as effective a sales term for Dell to sell to the
CIA as it was for Amazon and Apple and Google to sell to their users. I can
still close my eyes and hear Cliff schmoozing some CIA suit about how “with
the cloud, you’ll be able to push security updates across agency computers
worldwide,” or “when the cloud’s up and running, the agency will be able to
track who has read what file worldwide.” The cloud was white and fluffy and
peaceful, floating high above the fray. Though many clouds make a stormy sky,
a single cloud provided a benevolent bit of shade. It was protective. I think
it made everyone think of heaven.

Dell—along with the largest cloud-based private companies, Amazon, Apple, and
Google—regarded the rise of the cloud as a new age of computing. But in
concept, at least, it was something of a regression to the old mainframe
architecture of computing’s earliest history, where many users all depended
upon a single powerful central core that could only be maintained by an elite
cadre of professionals. The world had abandoned this “impersonal” mainframe
model only a generation before, once businesses like Dell developed “personal”
computers cheap enough, and simple enough, to appeal to mortals. The
renaissance that followed produced desktops, laptops, tablets, and
smartphones—all devices that allowed people the freedom to make an immense
amount of creative work. The only issue was—how to store it?

This was the genesis of “cloud computing.” Now it didn’t really matter what
kind of personal computer you had, because the real computers that you relied
upon were warehoused in the enormous data centers that the cloud companies
built throughout the world. These were, in a sense, the new mainframes, row
after row of racked, identical servers linked together in such a way that each
individual machine acted together within a collective computing system. The
loss of a single server or even of an entire data center no longer mattered,
because they were mere droplets in the larger, global cloud.

From the standpoint of a regular user, a cloud is just a storage mechanism
that ensures that your data is being processed or stored not on your personal
device, but on a range of different servers, which can ultimately be owned and
operated by different companies. The result is that your data is no longer
truly yours. It’s controlled by companies, which can use it for virtually any
purpose.

Read your terms of service agreements for cloud storage, which get longer and
longer by the year—current ones are over six thousand words, twice the average
length of one of these book chapters. When we choose to store our data online,
we’re often ceding our claim to it. Companies can decide what type of data
they will hold for us, and can willfully delete any data they object to.
Unless we’ve kept a separate copy on our own machines or drives, this data
will be lost to us forever. If any of our data is found to be particularly
objectionable or otherwise in violation of the terms of service, the companies
can unilaterally delete our accounts, deny us our own data, and yet retain a
copy for their own records, which they can turn over to the authorities
without our knowledge or consent. Ultimately, the privacy of our data depends
on the ownership of our data. There is no property less protected, and yet no
property more private.

* * *

THE INTERNET I’D grown up with, the Internet that had raised me, was
disappearing. And with it, so was my youth. The very act of going online,
which had once seemed like a marvelous adventure, now seemed like a fraught
ordeal. Self-expression now required such strong self-protection as to obviate
its liberties and nullify its pleasures. Every communication was a matter not
of creativity but of safety. Every transaction was a potential danger.

Meanwhile, the private sector was busy leveraging our reliance on technology
into market consolidation. The majority of American Internet users lived their
entire digital lives on email, social media, and e-commerce platforms owned by
an imperial triumvirate of companies (Google, Facebook, and Amazon), and the
American IC was seeking to take advantage of that fact by obtaining access to
their networks—both through direct orders that were kept secret from the
public, and clandestine subversion efforts that were kept secret from the
companies themselves. Our user data was turning vast profits for the
companies, and the government pilfered it for free. I don’t think I’d ever
felt so powerless.

Then there was this other emotion that I felt, a curious sense of being adrift
and yet, at the same time, of having my privacy violated. It was as if I were
dispersed—with parts of my life scattered across servers all over the
globe—and yet intruded or imposed upon. Every morning when I left our town
house, I found myself nodding at the security cameras dotted throughout our
development. Previously I’d never paid them any attention, but now, when a
light turned red on my commute, I couldn’t help but think of its leering
sensor, keeping tabs on me whether I blew through the intersection or stopped.
License-plate readers were recording my comings and goings, even if I
maintained a speed of 35 miles per hour.

America’s fundamental laws exist to make the job of law enforcement not easier
but harder. This isn’t a bug, it’s a core feature of democracy. In the
American system, law enforcement is expected to protect citizens from one
another. In turn, the courts are expected to restrain that power when it’s
abused, and to provide redress against the only members of society with the
domestic authority to detain, arrest, and use force—including lethal force.
Among the most important of these restraints are the prohibitions against law
enforcement surveilling private citizens on their property and taking
possession of their private recordings without a warrant. There are few laws,
however, that restrain the surveillance of public property, which includes the
vast majority of America’s streets and sidewalks.

Law enforcement’s use of surveillance cameras on public property was
originally conceived of as a crime deterrent and an aid to investigators after
a crime had occurred. But as the cost of these devices continued to fall, they
became ubiquitous, and their role became preemptive—with law enforcement using
them to track people who had not committed, or were not even suspected of, any
crime. And the greatest danger still lies ahead, with the refinement of
artificial intelligence capabilities such as facial and pattern recognition.
An AI-equipped surveillance camera would be no mere recording device, but
could be made into something closer to an automated police officer—a true
robo-cop actively seeking out “suspicious” activity, such as apparent drug
deals (that is, people embracing or shaking hands) and apparent gang
affiliation (such as people wearing specific colors and brands of clothing).
Even in 2011, it was clear to me that this was where technology was leading
us, without any substantive public debate.

Potential monitoring abuses piled up in my mind to cumulatively produce a
vision of an appalling future. A world in which all people were totally
surveilled would logically become a world in which all laws were totally
enforced, automatically, by computers. After all, it’s difficult to imagine an
AI device that’s capable of noticing a person breaking the law not holding
that person accountable. No policing algorithm would ever be programmed, even
if it could be, toward leniency or forgiveness.

I wondered whether this would be the final but grotesque fulfillment of the
original American promise that all citizens would be equal before the law: an
equality of oppression through total automated law enforcement. I imagined the
future SmartFridge stationed in my kitchen, monitoring my conduct and habits,
and using my tendency to drink straight from the carton or not wash my hands
to evaluate the probability of my being a felon.

Such a world of total automated law enforcement—of, say, all pet-ownership
laws, or all zoning laws regulating home businesses—would be intolerable.
Extreme justice can turn out to be extreme injustice, not just in terms of the
severity of punishment for an infraction, but also in terms of how
consistently and thoroughly the law is applied and prosecuted. Nearly every
large and long-lived society is full of unwritten laws that everyone is
expected to follow, along with vast libraries of written laws that no one is
expected to follow, or even know about. According to Maryland Criminal Law
Section 10-501, adultery is illegal and punishable by a $10 fine. In North
Carolina, statute 14-309.8 makes it illegal for a bingo game to last more than
five hours. Both of these laws come from a more prudish past and yet, for one
reason or another, were never repealed. Most of our lives, even if we don’t
realize it, occur not in black and white but in a gray area, where we jaywalk,
put trash in the recycling bin and recyclables in the trash, ride our bicycles
in the improper lane, and borrow a stranger’s Wi-Fi to download a book that we
didn’t pay for. Put simply, a world in which every law is always enforced
would be a world in which everyone was a criminal.

I tried to talk to Lindsay about all this. But though she was generally
sympathetic to my concerns, she wasn’t so sympathetic that she was ready to go
off the grid, or even off Facebook or Instagram. “If I did that,” she said,
“I’d be giving up my art and abandoning my friends. You used to like being in
touch with other people.”

She was right. And she was right to be worried about me. She thought I was too
tense, and under too much stress. I was—not because of my work, but because of
my desire to tell her a truth that I wasn’t allowed to. I couldn’t tell her
that my former coworkers at the NSA could target her for surveillance and read
the love poems she texted me. I couldn’t tell her that they could access all
the photos she took—not just her public photos, but the intimate ones. I
couldn’t tell her that her information was being collected, that everyone’s
information was being collected, which was tantamount to a government threat:
If you ever get out of line, we’ll use your private life against you.

I tried to explain it to her, obliquely, through an analogy. I told her to
imagine opening up her laptop one day and finding a spreadsheet on her
desktop.

“Why?” she said. “I don’t like spreadsheets.”

I wasn’t prepared for this response, so I just said the first thing that came
to mind. “Nobody does, but this one’s called _The End_.”

“Ooh, mysterious.”

“You don’t remember having created this spreadsheet, but once you open it up,
you recognize its contents. Because inside it is everything, absolutely
everything, that could ruin you. Every speck of information that could destroy
your life.”

Lindsay smiled. “Can I see the one for you?”

She was joking, but I wasn’t. A spreadsheet containing every scrap of data
about you would pose a mortal hazard. Imagine it: all the secrets big and
small that could end your marriage, end your career, poison even your closest
relationships, and leave you broke, friendless, and in prison. Maybe the
spreadsheet would include the joint you smoked last weekend at a friend’s
house, or the one line of cocaine you snorted off the screen of your phone in
a bar in college. Or the drunken one-night stand you had with your friend’s
girlfriend, who’s now your friend’s wife, which you both regret and have
agreed never to mention to anyone. Or an abortion you got when you were a
teenager, which you kept hidden from your parents and that you’d like to keep
hidden from your spouse. Or maybe it’s just information about a petition you
signed, or a protest you attended. Everyone has something, some compromising
information buried among their bytes—if not in their files then in their
email, if not in their email then in their browsing history. And now this
information was being stored by the US government.

Some time after our exchange, Lindsay came up to me and said, “I figured out
what would be on my Spreadsheet of Total Destruction—the secret that would
ruin me.”

“What?”

“I’m not going to tell you.”

I tried to chill, but I kept having strange physical symptoms. I’d become
weirdly clumsy, falling off ladders—more than once—or bumping into door
frames. Sometimes I’d trip, or drop spoons I was holding, or fail to gauge
distances accurately and miss what I was reaching for. I’d spill water over
myself, or choke on it. Lindsay and I would be in the middle of a conversation
when I’d miss what she’d said, and she’d ask where I’d gone to—it was like I’d
been frozen in another world.

One day when I went to meet Lindsay after her pole-fitness class, I started
feeling dizzy. This was the most disturbing of the symptoms I’d had thus far.
It scared me, and scared Lindsay, too, especially when it led to a gradual
diminishing of my senses. I had too many explanations for these incidents:
poor diet, lack of exercise, lack of sleep. I had too many rationalizations:
the plate was too close to the edge of the counter, the stairs were slippery.
I couldn’t make up my mind whether it was worse if what I was experiencing was
psychosomatic or genuine. I decided to go to the doctor, but the only
appointment wasn’t for weeks.

A day or so later, I was home around noon, trying my best to keep up with work
remotely. I was on the phone with a security officer at Dell when the
dizziness hit me hard. I immediately excused myself from the call, slurring my
words, and as I struggled to hang up the phone, I was sure: I was going to
die.

For those who’ve experienced it, this sense of impending doom needs no
description, and for those who haven’t, there is no explanation. It strikes so
suddenly and primally that it wipes out all other feeling, all thought besides
helpless resignation. My life was over. I slumped in my chair, a big black
padded Aeron that tilted underneath me as I fell into a void and lost
consciousness.

I came to still seated, with the clock on my desk reading just shy of 1:00
p.m. I’d been out less than an hour, but I was exhausted. It was as if I’d
been awake since the beginning of time.

I reached for the phone in a panic, but my hand kept missing it and grabbing
the air. Once I managed to grab ahold of it and get a dial tone, I found I
couldn’t remember Lindsay’s number, or could only remember the digits but not
their order.

Somehow I managed to get myself downstairs, taking each step deliberately,
palm against the wall. I got some juice out of the fridge and chugged it,
keeping both hands on the carton and dribbling a fair amount on my chin. Then
I lay down on the floor, pressed my cheek to the cool linoleum, and fell
asleep, which was how Lindsay found me.

I’d just had an epileptic seizure.

My mother had epilepsy, and for a time at least was prone to grand mal
seizures: the foaming at the mouth, her limbs thrashing, her body rolling
around until it stilled into a horrible unconscious rigidity. I couldn’t
believe I hadn’t previously associated my symptoms with hers, though that was
the very same denial she herself had been in for decades, attributing her
frequent falls to “clumsiness” and “lack of coordination.” She hadn’t been
diagnosed until her first grand mal in her late thirties, and, after a brief
spell on medication, her seizures stopped. She’d always told me and my sister
that epilepsy wasn’t hereditary and to this day I’m still not sure if that’s
what her doctor had told her or if she was just trying to reassure us that her
fate wouldn’t be ours.

There is no diagnostic test for epilepsy. The clinical diagnosis is just two
or more unexplained seizures—that’s it. Very little is known about the
condition. Medicine tends to treat epilepsy phenomenologically. Doctors don’t
talk about “epilepsy,” they talk about “seizures.” They tend to divide
seizures into two types: localized and generalized, the former being an
electrical misfire in a certain section of your brain that doesn’t spread, the
latter being an electrical misfire that creates a chain reaction. Basically, a
wave of misfiring synapses rolls across your brain, causing you to lose motor
function and, ultimately, consciousness.

Epilepsy is such a strange syndrome. Its sufferers feel different things,
depending on which part of their brain has the initial electrical cascade
failure. Those who have this failure in their auditory center famously hear
bells. Those who have it in their visual center either have their vision go
dark or see sparkles. If the failure happens in the deeper core areas of the
brain—which was where mine occurred—it can cause severe vertigo. In time, I
came to know the warning signs, so I could prepare for an oncoming seizure.
These signs are called “auras,” in the popular language of epilepsy, though in
scientific fact these auras are the seizure itself. They are the
proprioceptive experience of the misfire.

I consulted with as many epilepsy specialists as I could find—the best part of
working for Dell was the insurance: I had CAT scans, MRIs, the works.
Meanwhile, Lindsay, who was my stalwart angel throughout all this, driving me
back and forth from appointments, went about researching all the information
that was available about the syndrome. She Googled both allopathic and
homeopathic treatments so intensely that basically all her Gmail ads were for
epilepsy pharmaceuticals.

I felt defeated. The two great institutions of my life had been betrayed and
were betraying me: my country and the Internet. And now my body was following
suit.

My brain had, quite literally, short-circuited.

