# The Tunnel

Imagine you’re entering a tunnel. Imagine the perspective: as you look down
the length that stretches ahead of you, notice how the walls seem to narrow to
the tiny dot of light at the other end. The light at the end of the tunnel is
a symbol of hope, and it’s also what people say they see in near-death
experiences. They have to go to it, they say. They’re drawn to it. But then
where else is there to go in a tunnel, except through it? Hasn’t everything
led up to this point?

My tunnel was the Tunnel: an enormous Pearl Harbor–era airplane factory turned
NSA facility located under a pineapple field in Kunia, on the island of Oahu,
Hawaii. The facility was built out of reinforced concrete, its eponymous
tunnel a kilometer-long tube in the side of a hill opening up into three
cavernous floors of server vaults and offices. At the time the Tunnel was
built, the hill was covered over with huge amounts of sand, soil, desiccated
pineapple plant leaves, and patches of sun-parched grass to camouflage it from
Japanese bombers. Sixty years later it resembled the vast burial mound of a
lost civilization, or some gigantic arid pile that a weird god had heaped up
in the middle of a god-size sandbox. Its official name was the Kunia Regional
Security Operations Center.

I went to work there, still on a Dell contract, but now for the NSA again,
early in 2012. One day that summer—actually, it was my birthday—as I passed
through the security checks and proceeded down the tunnel, it struck me: this,
in front of me, was my future.

I’m not saying that I made any decisions at that instant. The most important
decisions in life are never made that way. They’re made subconsciously and
only express themselves consciously once fully formed—once you’re finally
strong enough to admit to yourself that this is what your conscience has
already chosen for you, this is the course that your beliefs have decreed.
That was my twenty-ninth birthday present to myself: the awareness that I had
entered a tunnel that would narrow my life down toward a single, still-
indistinct act.

Just as Hawaii has always been an important waystation—historically, the US
military treated the island chain as little more than a mid-Pacific refueling
depot for boats and planes—it had also become an important switchpoint for
American communications. These include the intelligence that flowed between
the contiguous forty-eight states and my former place of employment, Japan, as
well as other sites in Asia.

The job I’d taken was a significant step down the career ladder, with duties I
could at this point perform in my sleep. It was supposed to mean less stress,
a lighter burden. I was the sole employee of the aptly named Office of
Information Sharing, where I worked as a SharePoint systems administrator.
SharePoint is a Microsoft product, a dopey poky program, or rather a grab-bag
of programs, focused on internal document management: who can read what, who
can edit what, who can send and receive what, and so on. By making me Hawaii’s
SharePoint systems administrator, the NSA had made me the manager of document
management. I was, in effect, the reader in chief at one of the agency’s most
significant facilities. As was my typical practice in any new technical
position, I spent the earliest days automating my tasks—meaning writing
scripts to do my work for me—so as to free up my time for something more
interesting.

Before I go any further, I want to emphasize this: my active searching out of
NSA abuses began not with the copying of documents, but with the reading of
them. My initial intention was just to confirm the suspicions that I’d first
had back in 2009 in Tokyo. Three years later, I was determined to find out if
an American system of mass surveillance existed and, if it did, how it
functioned. Though I was uncertain about how to conduct this investigation, I
was at least sure of this: I had to understand exactly how the system worked
before I could decide what, if anything, to do about it.

* * *

THIS, OF COURSE, was not why Lindsay and I had come to Hawaii. We hadn’t
hauled all the way out to paradise just so I could throw our lives away for a
principle.

We’d come to start over. To start over yet again.

My doctors told me that the climate and more relaxed lifestyle in Hawaii might
be beneficial for my epilepsy, since lack of sleep was thought to be the
leading trigger of the seizures. Also, the move eliminated the driving
problem: the Tunnel was within bicycling distance of a number of communities
in Kunia, the quiet heart of the island’s dry, red interior. It was a
pleasant, twenty-minute ride to work, through sugarcane fields in brilliant
sunshine. With the mountains rising calm and high in the clear blue distance,
the gloomy mood of the last few months lifted like the morning fog.

Lindsay and I found a decent-size bungalow-type house on Eleu Street in
Waipahu’s Royal Kunia, which we furnished with our stuff from Columbia,
Maryland, since Dell paid relocation expenses. The furniture didn’t get much
use, though, since the sun and heat would often cause us to walk in the door,
strip off our clothes, and lie naked on the carpet beneath the overworked air
conditioner. Eventually, Lindsay turned the garage into a fitness studio,
filling it with yoga mats and the spinning pole she’d brought from Columbia. I
set up a new Tor server. Soon, traffic from around the world was reaching the
Internet via the laptop sitting in our entertainment center, which had the
ancillary benefit of hiding my own Internet activity in the noise.

One night during the summer I turned twenty-nine, Lindsay finally prevailed on
me to go out with her to a luau. She’d been after me to go for a while,
because a few of her pole-fitness friends had been involved in some hula-girl
capacity, but I’d been resistant. It had seemed like such a cheesy touristy
thing to do, and had felt, somehow, disrespectful. Hawaiian culture is
ancient, although its traditions are very much alive; the last thing I wanted
was to disturb someone’s sacred ritual.

Finally, however, I capitulated. I’m very glad I did. What impressed me the
most was not the luau itself—though it was very much a fire-twirling
spectacle—but the old man who was holding court nearby in a little
amphitheater down by the sea. He was a native Hawaiian, an erudite man with
that soft but nasal island voice, who was telling a group of people gathered
around a fire the creation stories of the islands’ indigenous peoples.

The one story that stuck with me concerned the twelve sacred islands of the
gods. Apparently, there had existed a dozen islands in the Pacific that were
so beautiful and pure and blessed with freshwater that they had to be kept
secret from humanity, who would spoil them. Three of them were especially
revered: Kane-huna-moku, Kahiki, and Pali-uli. The lucky gods who inhabited
these islands decided to keep them hidden, because they believed that a
glimpse of their bounty would drive people mad. After considering numerous
ingenious schemes by which these islands might be concealed, including dyeing
them the color of the sea, or sinking them to the bottom of the ocean, they
finally decided to make them float in the air.

Once the islands were airborne, they were blown from place to place, staying
constantly in motion. At sunrise and sunset, especially, you might think that
you’d noticed one, hovering far at the horizon. But the moment you pointed it
out to anyone, it would suddenly drift away or assume another form entirely,
such as a pumice raft, a hunk of rock ejected by a volcanic eruption—or a
cloud.

I thought about that legend a lot while I went about my search. The
revelations I was pursuing were exactly like those islands: exotic preserves
that a pantheon of self-important, self-appointed rulers were convinced had to
be kept secret and hidden from humanity. I wanted to know what the NSA’s
surveillance capabilities were exactly; whether and how they extended beyond
the agency’s actual surveillance activities; who approved them; who knew about
them; and, last but surely not least, how these systems—both technical and
institutional—really operated.

The moment I’d think that I spotted one of these “islands”—some capitalized
code name I didn’t understand, some program referenced in a note buried at the
end of a report—I’d go chasing after further mentions of it in other
documents, but find none. It was as if the program I was searching for had
floated away from me and was lost. Then, days later, or weeks later, it might
surface again under a different designation, in a document from a different
department.

Sometimes I’d find a program with a recognizable name, but without an
explanation of what it did. Other times I’d just find a nameless explanation,
with no indication as to whether the capability it described was an active
program or an aspirational desire. I was running up against compartments
within compartments, caveats within caveats, suites within suites, programs
within programs. This was the nature of the NSA—by design, the left hand
rarely knew what the right hand was doing.

In a way, what I was doing reminded me of a documentary I once watched about
map-making—specifically, about the way that nautical charts were created in
the days before imaging and GPS. Ship captains would keep logs and note their
coordinates, which landbound mapmakers would then try to interpret. It was
through the gradual accretion of this data, over hundreds of years, that the
full extent of the Pacific became known, and all its islands identified.

But I didn’t have hundreds of years or hundreds of ships. I was alone, one man
hunched over a blank blue ocean, trying to find where this one speck of dry
land, this one data point, belonged in relation to all the others.

