# On the Couch

It was late at night on May 1, 2011, when I noticed the news alert on my
phone: Osama bin Laden had been tracked down to Abbottabad, Pakistan, and
killed by a team of Navy SEALs.

So there it was. The man who’d masterminded the attacks that had propelled me
into the army, and from there into the Intelligence Community, was now dead, a
dialysis patient shot point-blank in the embrace of his multiple wives in
their lavish compound just down the road from Pakistan’s major military
academy. Site after site showed maps indicating where the hell Abbottabad was,
alternating with street scenes from cities throughout America, where people
were fist-pumping, chest-bumping, yelling, getting wasted. Even New York was
celebrating, which almost never happens.

I turned off the phone. I just didn’t have it in me to join in. Don’t get me
wrong: I was glad the motherfucker was dead. I was just having a pensive
moment and felt a circle closing.

Ten years. That’s how long it had been since those two planes flew into the
Twin Towers, and what did we have to show for it? What had the last decade
actually accomplished? I sat on the couch I’d inherited from my mother’s condo
and gazed through the window into the street beyond as a neighbor honked the
horn of his parked car. I couldn’t shake the idea that I’d wasted the last
decade of my life.

The previous ten years had been a cavalcade of American-made tragedy: the
forever war in Afghanistan, catastrophic regime change in Iraq, indefinite
detentions at Guantánamo Bay, extraordinary renditions, torture, targeted
killings of civilians—even of American civilians—via drone strikes.
Domestically, there was the Homeland Securitization of everything, which
assigned a threat rating to every waking day (Red–Severe, Orange–High,
Yellow–Elevated), and, from the Patriot Act on, the steady erosion of civil
liberties, the very liberties we were allegedly fighting to protect. The
cumulative damage—the malfeasance in aggregate—was staggering to contemplate
and felt entirely irreversible, and yet we were still honking our horns and
flashing our lights in jubilation.

The biggest terrorist attack on American soil happened concurrently with the
development of digital technology, which made much of the earth American
soil—whether we liked it or not. Terrorism, of course, was the stated reason
why most of my country’s surveillance programs were implemented, at a time of
great fear and opportunism. But it turned out that fear was the true
terrorism, perpetrated by a political system that was increasingly willing to
use practically any justification to authorize the use of force. American
politicians weren’t as afraid of terror as they were of seeming weak, or of
being disloyal to their party, or of being disloyal to their campaign donors,
who had ample appetites for government contracts and petroleum products from
the Middle East. The politics of terror became more powerful than the terror
itself, resulting in “counterterror”: the panicked actions of a country
unmatched in capability, unrestrained by policy, and blatantly unconcerned
about upholding the rule of law. After 9/11, the IC’s orders had been “never
again,” a mission that could never be accomplished. A decade later, it had
become clear, to me at least, that the repeated evocations of terror by the
political class were not a response to any specific threat or concern but a
cynical attempt to turn terror into a permanent danger that required permanent
vigilance enforced by unquestionable authority.

After a decade of mass surveillance, the technology had proved itself to be a
potent weapon less against terror and more against liberty itself. By
continuing these programs, by continuing these lies, America was protecting
little, winning nothing, and losing much—until there would be few distinctions
left between those post-9/11 polarities of “Us” and “Them.”

* * *

THE LATTER HALF of 2011 passed in a succession of seizures, and in countless
doctors’ offices and hospitals. I was imaged, tested, and prescribed
medications that stabilized my body but clouded my mind, turning me depressed,
lethargic, and unable to focus.

I wasn’t sure how I was going to live with what Lindsay was now calling my
“condition” without losing my job. Being the top technologist for Dell’s CIA
account meant I had tremendous flexibility: my office was my phone, and I
could work from home. But meetings were an issue. They were always in
Virginia, and I lived in Maryland, a state whose laws prevented people
diagnosed with epilepsy from driving. If I were caught behind the wheel, I
could lose my driver’s license, and with it my ability to attend the meetings
that were the single nonnegotiable requirement of my position.

I finally gave in to the inevitable, took a short-term disability leave from
Dell, and decamped to my mother’s secondhand couch. It was as blue as my mood,
but comfortable. For weeks and weeks it was the center of my existence—the
place where I slept and ate and read and slept some more, the place where I
just generally wallowed bleakly as time mocked me.

I don’t remember what books I tried to read, but I do remember never managing
much more than a page before closing my eyes and sinking back again into the
cushions. I couldn’t concentrate on anything except my own weakness, the
uncooperative lump that used to be me spread across the upholstery, motionless
but for a lone finger atop the screen of the phone that was the only light in
the room.

I’d scroll through the news, then nap, then scroll again, then nap—while
protesters in Tunisia, Libya, Egypt, Yemen, Algeria, Morocco, Iraq, Lebanon,
and Syria were being imprisoned and tortured or just shot in the streets by
the secret state agents of thuggish regimes, many of which America had helped
keep in power. The suffering of that season was immense, spiraling out of the
regular news cycle. What I was witnessing was desperation, compared with which
my own struggles seemed cheap. They seemed small—morally and ethically
small—and privileged.

Throughout the Middle East, innocent civilians were living under the constant
threat of violence, with work and school suspended, no electricity, no sewage.
In many regions, they didn’t have access to even the most rudimentary medical
care. But if at any moment I doubted that my anxieties about surveillance and
privacy were relevant, or even appropriate, in the face of such immediate
danger and privation, I only had to pay a bit more attention to the crowds on
the street and the proclamations they were making—in Cairo and Sanaa, in
Beirut and Damascus, in Ahvaz, Khuzestan, and in every other city of the Arab
Spring and Iranian Green Movement. The crowds were calling for an end to
oppression, censorship, and precarity. They were declaring that in a truly
just society the people were not answerable to the government, the government
was answerable to the people. Although each crowd in each city, even on each
day, seemed to have its own specific motivation and its own specific goals,
they all had one thing in common: a rejection of authoritarianism, a
recommitment to the humanitarian principle that an individual’s rights are
inborn and inalienable.

In an authoritarian state, rights derive from the state and are granted to the
people. In a free state, rights derive from the people and are granted to the
state. In the former, people are subjects, who are only allowed to own
property, pursue an education, work, pray, and speak because their government
permits them to. In the latter, people are citizens, who agree to be governed
in a covenant of consent that must be periodically renewed and is
constitutionally revocable. It’s this clash, between the authoritarian and the
liberal democratic, that I believe to be the major ideological conflict of my
time—not some concocted, prejudiced notion of an East-West divide, or of a
resurrected crusade against Christendom or Islam.

Authoritarian states are typically not governments of laws, but governments of
leaders, who demand loyalty from their subjects and are hostile to dissent.
Liberal-democratic states, by contrast, make no or few such demands, but
depend almost solely on each citizen voluntarily assuming the responsibility
of protecting the freedoms of everyone else around them, regardless of their
race, ethnicity, creed, ability, sexuality, or gender. Any collective
guarantee, predicated not on blood but on assent, will wind up favoring
egalitarianism—and though democracy has often fallen far short of its ideal, I
still believe it to be the one form of governance that most fully enables
people of different backgrounds to live together, equal before the law.

This equality consists not only of rights but also of freedoms. In fact, many
of the rights most cherished by citizens of democracies aren’t even provided
for in law except by implication. They exist in that open-ended empty space
created through the restriction of government power. For example, Americans
only have a “right” to free speech because the government is forbidden from
making any law restricting that freedom, and a “right” to a free press because
the government is forbidden from making any law to abridge it. They only have
a “right” to worship freely because the government is forbidden from making
any law respecting an establishment of religion, and a “right” to peaceably
assemble and protest because the government is forbidden from making any law
that says they can’t.

In contemporary life, we have a single concept that encompasses all this
negative or potential space that’s off-limits to the government. That concept
is “privacy _._ ” It is an empty zone that lies beyond the reach of the state,
a void into which the law is only permitted to venture with a warrant—and not
a warrant “for everybody,” such as the one the US government has arrogated to
itself in pursuit of mass surveillance, but a warrant for a specific person or
purpose supported by a specific probable cause.

The word “privacy” itself is somewhat empty, because it is essentially
indefinable, or over-definable. Each of us has our own idea of what it is.
“Privacy” means something to everyone. There is no one to whom it means
nothing.

It’s because of this lack of common definition that citizens of pluralistic,
technologically sophisticated democracies feel that they have to justify their
desire for privacy and frame it as a right. But citizens of democracies don’t
have to justify that desire—the state, instead, must justify its violation. To
refuse to claim your privacy is actually to cede it, either to a state
trespassing its constitutional restraints or to a “private” business.

There is, simply, no way to ignore privacy. Because a citizenry’s freedoms are
interdependent, to surrender your own privacy is really to surrender
everyone’s. You might choose to give it up out of convenience, or under the
popular pretext that privacy is only required by those who have something to
hide. But saying that you don’t need or want privacy because you have nothing
to hide is to assume that no one should have, or could have, to hide
anything—including their immigration status, unemployment history, financial
history, and health records. You’re assuming that no one, including yourself,
might object to revealing to anyone information about their religious beliefs,
political affiliations, and sexual activities, as casually as some choose to
reveal their movie and music tastes and reading preferences.

Ultimately, saying that you don’t care about privacy because you have nothing
to hide is no different from saying you don’t care about freedom of speech
because you have nothing to say. Or that you don’t care about freedom of the
press because you don’t like to read. Or that you don’t care about freedom of
religion because you don’t believe in God. Or that you don’t care about the
freedom to peaceably assemble because you’re a lazy, antisocial agoraphobe.
Just because this or that freedom might not have meaning to you today doesn’t
mean that it doesn’t or won’t have meaning tomorrow, to you, or to your
neighbor—or to the crowds of principled dissidents I was following on my phone
who were protesting halfway across the planet, hoping to gain just a fraction
of the freedoms that my country was busily dismantling.

I wanted to help, but I didn’t know how. I’d had enough of feeling helpless,
of being just an asshole in flannel lying around on a shabby couch eating Cool
Ranch Doritos and drinking Diet Coke while the world went up in flames.

The young people of the Middle East were agitating for higher wages, lower
prices, and better pensions, but I couldn’t give them any of that, and no one
could give them a better shot at self-governance than the one they were taking
themselves. They were, however, also agitating for a freer Internet. They were
decrying Iran’s Ayatollah Khamenei, who had been increasingly censoring and
blocking threatening Web content, tracking and hacking traffic to offending
platforms and services, and shutting down certain foreign ISPs entirely. They
were protesting Egypt’s president, Hosni Mubarak, who’d cut off Internet
access for his whole country—which had merely succeeded in making every young
person in the country even more furious and bored, luring them out into the
streets.

Ever since I’d been introduced to the Tor Project in Geneva, I’d used its
browser and run my own Tor server, wanting to do my professional work from
home and my personal Web browsing unmonitored. Now, I shook off my despair,
propelled myself off the couch, and staggered over to my home office to set up
a bridge relay that would bypass the Iranian Internet blockades. I then
distributed its encrypted configuration identity to the Tor core developers.

This was the least I could do. If there was just the slightest chance that
even one young kid from Iran who hadn’t been able to get online could now
bypass the imposed filters and restrictions and connect to me—connect through
me—protected by the Tor system and my server’s anonymity, then it was
certainly worth my minimal effort.

I imagined this person reading their email, or checking their social media
accounts to make sure that their friends and family had not been arrested. I
had no way of knowing whether this was what they did, or whether anyone at all
linked to my server from Iran. And that was the point: the aid I offered was
private.

The guy who started the Arab Spring was almost exactly my age. He was a
produce peddler in Tunisia, selling fruits and vegetables out of a cart. In
protest against repeated harassment and extortion by the authorities, he stood
in the square and set fire to his life, dying a martyr. If burning himself to
death was the last free act he could manage in defiance of an illegitimate
regime, I could certainly get up off the couch and press a few buttons.

