# Fourth Estate

Nothing is harder than living with a secret that can’t be spoken. Lying to
strangers about a cover identity or concealing the fact that your office is
under the world’s most top-secret pineapple field might sound like it
qualifies, but at least you’re part of a team: though your work may be secret,
it’s a shared secret, and therefore a shared burden. There is misery but also
laughter.

When you have a real secret, though, that you can’t share with anyone, even
the laughter is a lie. I could talk about my concerns, but never about where
they were leading me. To the day I die I’ll remember explaining to my
colleagues how our work was being applied to violate the oaths we had sworn to
uphold and their verbal shrug in response: “What can you do about it?” I hated
that question, its sense of resignation, its sense of defeat, but it still
felt valid enough that I had to ask myself, “Well, what?”

When the answer presented itself, I decided to become a whistleblower. Yet to
breathe to Lindsay, the love of my life, even a word about that decision would
have put our relationship to an even crueler test than saying nothing. Not
wishing to cause her any more harm than I was already resigned to causing, I
kept silent, and in my silence I was alone.

I thought that solitude and isolation would be easy for me, or at least easier
than it had been for my predecessors in the whistleblowing world. Hadn’t each
step of my life served as a kind of preparation? Hadn’t I gotten used to being
alone, after all those years spent hushed and spellbound in front of a screen?
I’d been the solo hacker, the night-shift harbormaster, the keeper of the keys
in an empty office. But I was human, too, and the lack of companionship was
hard. Each day was haunted by struggle, as I tried and failed to reconcile the
moral and the legal, my duties and my desires. I had everything I’d ever
wanted—love, family, and success far beyond what I ever deserved—and I lived
in Eden amid plentiful trees, only one of which was forbidden to me. The
easiest thing should have been to follow the rules.

And even if I was already reconciled to the dangers of my decision, I wasn’t
yet adjusted to the role. After all, who was I to put this information in
front of the American public? Who’d elected me the president of secrets?

The information I intended to disclose about my country’s secret regime of
mass surveillance was so explosive, and yet so technical, that I was as scared
of being doubted as I was of being misunderstood. That was why my first
decision, after resolving to go public, was to go public with documentation.
The way to reveal a secret program might have been merely to describe its
existence, but the way to reveal programmatic secrecy was to describe its
workings. This required documents, the agency’s actual files—as many as
necessary to expose the scope of the abuse though I knew that disclosing even
one PDF would be enough to earn me prison.

The threat of government retribution against any entity or platform to which I
made the disclosure led me to briefly consider self-publishing. That would’ve
been the most convenient and safest method: just collecting the documents that
best communicated my concerns and posting them online, as they were, then
circulating a link. Ultimately, one of my reasons for not pursuing this course
had to do with authentication. Scores of people post “classified secrets” to
the Internet every day—many of them about time-travel technologies and aliens.
I didn’t want my own revelations, which were fairly incredible already, to get
lumped in with the outlandish and lost among the crazy.

It was clear to me then, from the earliest stage of the process, that I
required, and that the public deserved, some person or institution to vouch
for the veracity of the documents. I also wanted a partner to vet the
potential hazards posed by the revelation of classified information, and to
help explain that information by putting it in technological and legal
context. I trusted myself to present the problems with surveillance, and even
to analyze them, but I’d have to trust others to solve them. Regardless of how
wary of institutions I might have been by this point, I was far warier of
trying to act like one myself. Cooperating with some type of media
organization would defend me against the worst accusations of rogue activity,
and correct for whatever biases I had, whether they were conscious or
unconscious, personal or professional. I didn’t want any political opinion of
mine to prejudice anything with regard to the presentation, or reception, of
the disclosures. After all, in a country in which everyone was being
surveilled, no issue was less partisan than surveillance.

In retrospect, I have to credit at least some of my desire to find ideological
filters to Lindsay’s improving influence. Lindsay had spent years patiently
instilling in me the lesson that my interests and concerns weren’t always
hers, and certainly weren’t always the world’s, and that just because I shared
my knowledge didn’t mean that anyone had to share my opinion. Not everybody
who was opposed to invasions of privacy might be ready to adopt 256-bit
encryption standards or drop off the Internet entirely. An illegal act that
disturbed one person as a violation of the Constitution might upset another
person as a violation of their privacy, or of that of their spouse or
children. Lindsay was my key to unlocking this truth—that diverse motives and
approaches can only improve the chances of achieving common goals. She,
without even knowing it, gave me the confidence to conquer my qualms and reach
out to other people.

But which people? Who? It might be hard to remember, or even to imagine, but
at the time when I first considered coming forward, the whistleblower’s forum
of choice was WikiLeaks. Back then, it operated in many respects like a
traditional publisher, albeit one that was radically skeptical of state power.
WikiLeaks regularly joined up with leading international publications like the
_Guardian_ , the _New York Times_ , _Der Spiegel_ , _Le Monde_ , and _El País_
to publish the documents provided by its sources. The work that these partner
news organizations accomplished over the course of 2010 and 2011 suggested to
me that WikiLeaks was most valuable as a go-between that connected sources
with journalists, and as a firewall that preserved sources’ anonymity.

WikiLeaks’ practices changed following its publication of disclosures by US
Army private Chelsea Manning—huge caches of US military field logs pertaining
to the Iraq and Afghan wars, information about detainees at Guantanamo Bay,
along with US diplomatic cables. Due to the governmental backlash and media
controversy surrounding the site’s redaction of the Manning materials,
WikiLeaks decided to change course and publish future leaks as they received
them: pristine and unredacted. This switch to a policy of total transparency
meant that publishing with WikiLeaks would not meet my needs. Effectually, it
would have been the same for me as self-publishing, a route I’d already
rejected as insufficient. I knew that the story the NSA documents told about a
global system of mass surveillance deployed in the deepest secrecy was a
difficult one to understand—a story so tangled and technical that I was
increasingly convinced it could not be presented all at once in a “document
dump,” but only by the patient and careful work of journalists, undertaken, in
the best scenario I could conceive of, with the support of multiple
independent press institutions.

Though I felt some relief once I’d resolved to disclose directly to
journalists, I still had some lingering reservations. Most of them involved my
country’s most prestigious publications—particularly America’s newspaper of
record, the _New York Times._ Whenever I thought about contacting the _Times_
, I found myself hesitating. While the paper had shown some willingness to
displease the US government with its WikiLeaks reporting, I couldn’t stop
reminding myself of its earlier conduct involving an important article on the
government’s warrantless wiretapping program by Eric Lichtblau and James
Risen.

Those two journalists, by combining information from Justice Department
whistleblowers with their own reporting, had managed to uncover one aspect of
STELLARWIND—the NSA’s original-recipe post-9/11 surveillance initiative—and
had produced a fully written, edited, and fact-checked article about it, ready
to go to press by mid-2004. It was at this point that the paper’s editor in
chief, Bill Keller, ran the article past the government, as part of a courtesy
process whose typical purpose is for a publication’s editorial staff to have a
chance to assess the government’s arguments as to why the publication of
certain information might endanger national security. In this case, as in most
cases, the government refused to provide a specific reason, but implied that
one existed and that it was classified, too. The Bush administration told
Keller and the paper’s publisher, Arthur Sulzberger, without providing any
evidence, that the _Times_ would be emboldening America’s enemies and enabling
terror if it went public with the information that the government was
wiretapping American citizens without a warrant. Unfortunately, the paper
allowed itself to be convinced and spiked the article. Lichtblau and Risen’s
reporting finally ran, but over a year later, in December 2005, and only after
Risen pressured the paper by announcing that the material was included in a
book of his that was about to be released. Had that article run when it was
originally written, it might well have changed the course of the 2004
election.

If the _Times_ , or any paper, did something similar to me—if it took my
revelations, reported on them, submitted the reporting for review, and then
suppressed its publication—I’d be sunk. Given the likelihood of my
identification as the source, it would be tantamount to turning me in before
any revelations were brought to the public.

If I couldn’t trust a legacy newspaper, could I trust any institution? Why
even bother? I hadn’t signed up for any of this. I had just wanted to screw
around with computers and maybe do some good for my country along the way. I
had a lease and a lover and my health was improved. Every STOP sign on my
commute I took as advice to stop this voluntary madness. My head and heart
were in conflict, with the only constant being the desperate hope that
somebody else, somewhere else, would figure it out on their own. After all,
wasn’t journalism about following the bread crumbs and connecting the dots?
What else did reporters do all day, besides tweet?

I knew at least two things about the denizens of the Fourth Estate: they
competed for scoops, and they knew very little about technology. It was this
lack of expertise or even interest in tech that largely caused journalists to
miss two events that stunned me during the course of my fact-gathering about
mass surveillance.

The first was the NSA’s announcement of the construction of a vast new data
facility in Bluffdale, Utah. The agency called it the Massive Data Repository,
until somebody with a knack for PR realized the name might be tough to explain
if it ever got out, so it was renamed the Mission Data Repository—because as
long as you don’t change the acronym, you don’t have to change all the
briefing slides. The MDR was projected to contain a total of four twenty-five-
thousand-square-foot halls, filled with servers. It could hold an immense
amount of data, basically a rolling history of the entire planet’s pattern of
life, insofar as life can be understood through the connection of payments to
people, people to phones, phones to calls, calls to networks, and the synoptic
array of Internet activity moving along those networks’ lines.

The only prominent journalist who seemed to notice the announcement was James
Bamford, who wrote about it for _Wired_ in March 2012. There were a few
follow-ups in the nontech press, but none of them furthered the reporting. No
one asked what, to me at least, were the most basic questions: Why does any
government agency, let alone an intelligence agency, need that much space?
What data, and how much of it, do they really intend to store there, and for
how long? Because there was simply no reason to build something to those specs
unless you were planning on storing absolutely everything, forever. Here was,
to my mind, the corpus delicti—the plain-as-day corroboration of a crime, in a
gigantic concrete bunker surrounded by barbed wire and guard towers, sucking
up a city’s worth of electricity from its own power grid in the middle of the
Utah desert. And no one was paying attention.

The second event happened one year later, in March 2013—one week after Clapper
lied to Congress and Congress gave him a pass. A few periodicals had covered
that testimony, though they merely regurgitated Clapper’s denial that the NSA
collected bulk data on Americans. But no so-called mainstream publication at
all covered a rare public appearance by Ira “Gus” Hunt, the chief technology
officer of the CIA.

I’d known Gus slightly from my Dell stint with the CIA. He was one of our top
customers, and every vendor loved his apparent inability to be discreet: he’d
always tell you more than he was supposed to. For sales guys, he was like a
bag of money with a mouth. Now he was appearing as a special guest speaker at
a civilian tech event in New York called the GigaOM Structure: Data
conference. Anyone with $40 could go to it. The major talks, such as Gus’s,
were streamed for free live online.

The reason I’d made sure to catch his talk was that I’d just read, through
internal NSA channels, that the CIA had finally decided on the disposition of
its cloud contract. It had refused my old team at Dell, and turned down HP,
too, instead signing a ten-year, $600 million cloud development and management
deal with Amazon. I had no negative feelings about this—actually, at this
juncture, I was pleased that my work wasn’t going to be used by the agency. I
was just curious, from a professional standpoint, whether Gus might obliquely
address this announcement and offer any insight into why Amazon had been
chosen, since rumors were going around that the proposal process had been
rigged in Amazon’s favor.

I got insight, certainly, but of an unexpected kind. I had the opportunity of
witnessing the highest-ranking technical officer at the CIA stand onstage in a
rumpled suit and brief a crowd of uncleared normies—and, via the Internet, the
uncleared world—about the agency’s ambitions and capacities. As his
presentation unfolded, and he alternated bad jokes with an even worse command
of PowerPoint, I grew more and more incredulous.

“At the CIA,” he said, “we fundamentally try to collect everything and hang on
to it forever.” As if that wasn’t clear enough, he went on: “It is nearly
within our grasp to compute on all human generated information.” The underline
was Gus’s own. He was reading from his slide deck, ugly words in an ugly font
illustrated with the government’s signature four-color clip art.

There were a few journalists in the crowd, apparently, though it seemed as if
almost all of them were from specialty tech-government publications like
_Federal Computer Week._ It was telling that Gus stuck around for a Q & A
toward the conclusion of his presentation. Rather, it wasn’t quite a Q & A,
but more like an auxiliary presentation, offered directly to the journalists.
He must have been trying to get something off his chest, and it wasn’t just
his clown tie.

Gus told the journalists that the agency could track their smartphones, even
when they were turned off—that the agency could surveil every single one of
their communications. Remember: this was a crowd of domestic journalists.
American journalists. And the way that Gus said “could” came off as “has,”
“does,” and “will.” He perorated in a distinctly disturbed, and disturbing,
manner, at least for a CIA high priest: “Technology is moving faster than
government or law can keep up. It’s moving faster … than you can keep up: you
should be asking the question of what are your rights and who owns your data.”
I was floored—anybody more junior than Gus who had given a presentation like
this would’ve been wearing orange by the end of the day.

Coverage of Gus’s confession ran only in the _Huffington Post_. But the
performance itself lived on at YouTube, where it still remains, at least at
the time of this writing six years later. The last time I checked, it had 313
views—a dozen of them mine.

The lesson I took from this was that for my disclosures to be effective, I had
to do more than just hand some journalists some documents—more, even, than
help them interpret the documents. I had to become their partner, to provide
the technological training and tools to help them do their reporting
accurately and safely. Taking this course of action would mean giving myself
over totally to one of the capital crimes of intelligence work: whereas other
spies have committed espionage, sedition, and treason, I would be aiding and
abetting an act of journalism. The perverse fact is that legally, those crimes
are virtually synonymous. American law makes no distinction between providing
classified information to the press in the public interest and providing it,
even selling it, to the enemy. The only opinion I’ve ever found to contradict
this came from my first indoctrination into the IC: there, I was told that it
was in fact slightly better to offer secrets for sale to the enemy than to
offer them for free to a domestic reporter. A reporter will tell the public,
whereas an enemy is unlikely to share its prize even with its allies.

Given the risks I was taking, I needed to identify people I could trust who
were also trusted by the public. I needed reporters who were diligent yet
discreet, independent yet reliable. They would need to be strong enough to
challenge me on the distinctions between what I suspected and what the
evidence proved, and to challenge the government when it falsely accused their
work of endangering lives. Above all, I had to be sure that whoever I picked
wouldn’t ultimately cave to power when put under pressure that was certain to
be like nothing they, or I, had ever experienced before.

I cast my net not so widely as to imperil the mission, but widely enough to
avoid a single point of failure—the _New York Times_ problem. One journalist,
one publication, even one country of publication wouldn’t be enough, because
the US government had already demonstrated its willingness to stifle such
reporting. Ideally, I’d give each journalist their own set of documents
simultaneously, leaving me with none. This would shift the focus of scrutiny
to them, and ensure that even if I were arrested the truth would still get
out.

As I narrowed down my list of potential partners, I realized I’d been going
about this all wrong, or just wastefully. Instead of trying to select the
journalists on my own, I should have been letting the system that I was trying
to expose select them for me. My best partners, I decided, would be
journalists whom the national security state had already targeted.

Laura Poitras I knew as a documentarian, primarily concerned with America’s
post-9/11 foreign policy. Her film _My Country, My Country_ depicted the 2005
Iraqi national elections that were conducted under (and frustrated by) the US
occupation. She had also made _The Program_ , about the NSA cryptanalyst
William Binney—who had raised objections through proper channels about
TRAILBLAZER, the predecessor of STELLARWIND, only to be accused of leaking
classified information, subjected to repeated harassment, and arrested at
gunpoint in his home, though never charged. Laura herself had been frequently
harassed by the government because of her work, repeatedly detained and
interrogated by border agents whenever she traveled in or out of the country.

Glenn Greenwald I knew as a civil liberties lawyer turned columnist, initially
for _Salon_ —where he was one of the few who wrote about the unclassified
version of the NSA IG’s Report back in 2009—and later for the US edition of
the _Guardian_. I liked him because he was skeptical and argumentative, the
kind of man who’d fight with the devil, and when the devil wasn’t around fight
with himself. Though Ewen MacAskill, of the British edition of the _Guardian_
, and Bart Gellman of the _Washington Post_ would later prove stalwart
partners (and patient guides to the journalistic wilderness), I found my
earliest affinity with Laura and Glenn, perhaps because they weren’t merely
interested in reporting on the IC but had personal stakes in understanding the
institution.

The only hitch was getting in touch.

Unable to reveal my true name, I contacted the journalists under a variety of
identities, disposable masks worn for a time and then discarded. The first of
these was “Cincinnatus,” after the legendary farmer who became a Roman consul
and then voluntarily relinquished his power. That was followed by
“Citizenfour,” a handle that some journalists took to mean that I considered
myself the fourth dissident-employee in the NSA’s recent history, after Binney
and his fellow TRAILBLAZER whistleblowers J. Kirk Wiebe and Ed Loomis—though
the triumvirate I actually had in mind consisted of Thomas Drake, who
disclosed the existence of TRAILBLAZER to journalists, and Daniel Ellsberg and
Anthony Russo, whose disclosure of _The Pentagon Papers_ helped expose the
deceptions of the Vietnam War and bring it to an end. The final name I chose
for my correspondence was “Verax,” Latin for “speaker of truth,” in the hopes
of proposing an alternative to the model of a hacker called “Mendax” (“speaker
of lies”)—the pseudonym of the young man who’d grow up to become WikiLeaks’
Julian Assange.

You can’t really appreciate how hard it is to stay anonymous online until
you’ve tried to operate as if your life depended on it. Most of the
communications systems set up in the IC have a single basic aim: the observer
of a communication must not be able to discern the identities of those
involved, or in any way attribute them to an agency. This is why the IC calls
these exchanges “non-attributable.” The pre-Internet spycraft of anonymity is
famous, mostly from TV and the movies: a safe-house address coded in bathroom-
stall graffiti, for instance, or scrambled into the abbreviations of a
classified ad. Or think of the Cold War’s “dead drops,” the chalk marks on
mailboxes signaling that a secret package was waiting inside a particular
hollowed-out tree in a public park. The modern version might be fake profiles
trading fake chats on a dating site, or, more commonly, just a superficially
innocuous app that leaves superficially innocuous messages on a superficially
innocuous Amazon server secretly controlled by the CIA. What I wanted,
however, was something even better than that—something that required none of
that exposure, and none of that budget.

I decided to use somebody else’s Internet connection. I wish that were simply
a matter of going to a McDonald’s or Starbucks and signing on to their Wi-Fi.
But those places have CCTV, and receipts, and other people—memories with legs.
Moreover, every wireless device, from a phone to a laptop, has a globally
unique identifier called a MAC (Machine Address Code), which it leaves on
record with every access point it connects to—a forensic marker of its user’s
movements.

So I didn’t go to McDonald’s or Starbucks—I went driving. Specifically, I went
war-driving, which is when you convert your car into a roving Wi-Fi sensor.
For this you need a laptop, a high-powered antenna, and a magnetic GPS sensor,
which can be slapped atop the roof. Power is provided by the car or by a
portable battery, or else by the laptop itself. Everything you need can fit
into a backpack.

I took along a cheap laptop running TAILS, which is a Linux-based “amnesiac”
operating system—meaning it forgets everything when you turn it off, and
starts fresh when you boot it up again, with no logs or memory traces of
anything ever done on it. TAILS allowed me to easily “spoof,” or disguise, the
laptop’s MAC: whenever it connected to a network it left behind the record of
some other machine, in no way associable with mine. Usefully enough, TAILS
also had built-in support for connecting to the anonymizing Tor network.

At nights and on weekends, I drove around what seemed like the entire island
of Oahu, letting my antenna pick up the pulses of each Wi-Fi network. My GPS
sensor tagged each access point with the location at which it was noticed,
thanks to a mapping program I used called Kismet. What resulted was a map of
the invisible networks we pass by every day without even noticing, a
scandalously high percentage of which had either no security at all or
security I could trivially bypass. Some of the networks required more
sophisticated hacking. I’d briefly jam a network, causing its legitimate users
to be booted off-line; in their attempt to reconnect, they’d automatically
rebroadcast their “authentication packets,” which I could intercept and
effectively decipher into passwords that would let me log on just like any
other “authorized” user.

With this network map in hand, I’d drive around Oahu like a madman, trying to
check my email to see which of the journalists had replied to me. Having made
contact with Laura Poitras, I’d spend much of the evening writing to
her—sitting behind the wheel of my car at the beach, filching the Wi-Fi from a
nearby resort. Some of the journalists I’d chosen needed convincing to use
encrypted email, which back in 2012 was a pain. In some cases, I had to show
them how, so I’d upload tutorials—sitting in my idling car in a parking lot,
availing myself of the network of a library. Or of a school. Or of a gas
station. Or of a bank—which had horrifyingly poor protections. The point was
to not create any patterns.

Atop the parking garage of a mall, secure in the knowledge that the moment I
closed the lid of my laptop, my secret was safe, I’d draft manifestos
explaining why I’d gone public, but then delete them. And then I’d try writing
emails to Lindsay, only to delete them, too. I just couldn’t find the words.

